Vol:.(1234567890)
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-024-01183-y
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Warning before misinformation exposure modulates memory 
encoding
Jessica M. Karanian1 · Ayanna K. Thomas2 · Elizabeth Race2 
Accepted: 1 March 2024 / Published online: 19 March 2024 
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the US; foreign copyright protection may apply 2024
Abstract
Exposure to misleading information after witnessing an event can impair future memory reports about the event. This pervasive 
form of memory distortion, termed the misinformation effect, can be significantly reduced if individuals are warned about the 
reliability of post-event information before exposure to misleading information. The present fMRI study investigated whether 
such prewarnings improve subsequent memory accuracy by influencing encoding-related neural activity during exposure to 
misinformation. We employed a repeated retrieval misinformation paradigm in which participants watched a crime video 
(Witnessed Event), completed an initial test of memory, listened to a post-event auditory narrative that contained consistent, 
neutral, and misleading details (Post-Event Information), and then completed a final test of memory. At the behavioral level, 
participants who were given a prewarning before the Post-Event Information were less susceptible to misinformation on the 
final memory test compared with participants who were not given a warning (Karanian et al., Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 117, 22771–22779, 2020). This protection from misinformation was 
accompanied by greater activity in frontal regions associated with source encoding (lateral PFC) and conflict detection (ACC) 
during misleading trials as well as a more global reduction in activity in auditory cortex and semantic processing regions (left 
inferior frontal gyrus) across all trials (consistent, neutral, misleading) of the Post-Event Information narrative. Importantly, 
the strength of these warning-related activity modulations was associated with better protection from misinformation on the 
final memory test (improved memory accuracy on misleading trials). Together, these results suggest that warnings modulate 
encoding-related neural activity during exposure to misinformation to improve memory accuracy.
Keywords Misinformation effect · Prewarning · fMRI · Source misattribution · False memory · Prospective warning
Introduction
Decades of research have identified the misinformation 
effect—a robust effect in which exposure to new informa-
tion after an event can impair subsequent memory for the 
original event (for a review, see Loftus, 2005). To induce 
the misinformation effect, researchers present mock eyewit-
nesses with an event (i.e., Witnessed Event), often in the 
visual modality in the form of a video or a series of vignettes 
(Chan et al., 2009; Okado & Stark, 2005). After the event, 
mock eyewitnesses are provided with a verbal or visual 
recounting of the event (Post-Event Information). Critically, 
some of the Post-Event Information, referred to as misin-
formation, conflicts with the Witnessed Event. Later, when 
asked to answer questions about the Witnessed Event, mock 
eyewitnesses often falsely attribute the misinformation to 
the original witnessed event. The misinformation effect is 
traditionally measured by examining whether original event 
information is less accessible on a final test of memory and 
by examining the likelihood of producing or selecting the 
suggested misinformation in response to questions about the 
witnessed event.
Research has indicated that source misattribution may be 
one explanation for producing or selecting suggested mis-
information in response to questions about the witnessed 
event. That is, when asked to retrieve an event detail, partici-
pants may retrieve a misleading detail and incorrectly attrib-
ute it to the original event (Ayers & Reder, 1998; Lindsay & 
 * Jessica M. Karanian

jessica.karanian@fairfield.edu
1 
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Fairfield 
University, 1073 North Benson Road, Fairfield, CT 06824, 
USA
2 
Department of Psychology, Tufts University, 419 Boston 
Ave, Medford, MA 02155, USA

441
Johnson, 1989a, 1989b). This consistent observation of the 
misinformation effect in the laboratory highlights the ease 
with which misleading information can be incorporated into 
memory and has implications for the reliability (or unreli-
ability) of real-world eyewitness memory reports.
Importantly, a growing body of evidence suggests that 
providing a warning about the credibility of Post-Event 
Information can improve memory accuracy in the face of 
misinformation. For example, Blank & Launay (2014) con-
ducted a meta-analysis and found that providing individuals 
with a retrospective warning immediately before a memory 
test (postwarning) cuts the size of the misinformation effect 
approximately in half (Blank & Launay, 2014). Participants 
were more likely to retrieve information from the witnessed 
event and less likely to produce or select misinformation. 
This protective effect of warning also has been observed 
in the context of repeated memory retrieval (Thomas et al., 
2010), when participants recall details of an event before 
exposure to misinformation and susceptibility to misin-
formation is typically enhanced (Chan et al., 2009; Chan 
& LaPaglia, 2011; LaPaglia & Chan, 2013; Wilford et al., 
2014; Gordon et al., 2015).
Postwarnings may encourage participants to consider 
the source or context in which each piece of information 
was first encountered (i.e., Witnessed Event vs. Post-Event 
Information) during the final memory test so that only 
information from the original Witnessed Event will be 
endorsed (Blank & Launay, 2014; for a review, see Johnson 
et al., 1993). Support for this proposal comes from a recent 
fMRI study by Karanian & colleagues (Karanian et al., 
2020). In this study, participants watched a silent crime 
video (Witnessed Event), took an initial memory test about 
the video, listened to an audio narrative with misinformation 
(Post-Event Information), and then took a final memory test 
(Final Memory Test). When participants received a warning 
about the reliability of the Post-Event Information (either 
before or after the Post-Event Information), they were less 
likely to endorse misleading details as being from the original 
witnessed event during the final test of memory compared 
with when they were not warned. Importantly, warnings also 
influenced neural activity during memory retrieval, both 
by increasing activity in visual regions associated with the 
original source of information (video; Witnessed Event) as 
well as by decreasing activity in auditory regions associated 
with the misleading source of information (audio narrative; 
Post-Event Information). Stronger visual reactivation during 
memory retrieval was associated with reduced selection 
of misinformation, whereas stronger auditory reactivation 
was associated with increased selection of misinformation. 
These results suggest that warnings modulate reconstructive 
processes at the time of memory retrieval (Final Memory Test) 
and improve memory accuracy by encouraging retrieval from 
the original source of information (e.g., video; Witnessed 
Event) while reducing retrieval from the misleading source 
of information (e.g., audio narrative; Post-Event Information).
While the results of Karanian & colleagues (Karanian 
et al., 2020) highlight the impact of warnings on memory 
retrieval, prospective warnings given before Post-Event 
Information (prewarnings) also may impact the initial 
encoding of misinformation. To date, only a few studies 
have investigated the underlying mechanisms by which pre-
warnings influence memory accuracy in the face of misin-
formation. Greene et al. (1982) presented participants with a 
series of images depicting a burglary (Witnessed Event), had 
participants read a paragraph containing misleading infor-
mation (Post-Event Information), and then administered a 
memory test (Final Memory Test). Participants who were 
warned about possible inaccuracies of the paragraph before 
exposure to the Post-Event Information committed fewer 
misinformation errors on the final memory test compared 
with unwarned participants. Critically, participants who 
received a prewarning also spent more time reading the Post-
Event Information. These results suggest that in addition to 
influencing information processing at the time of memory 
retrieval, prewarnings also may improve memory accuracy 
by influencing encoding-related processes during exposure 
to misinformation (Gallo et al., 2001).
In line with this proposal, previous neuroimaging research 
suggests that encoding-related processes during exposure to 
misinformation play an important role in determining later 
memory accuracy in misinformation paradigms. For exam-
ple, Okado & Stark (2005) found that during exposure to vis-
ual misinformation, activity in multiple brain regions, such 
as the prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 
and subregions of the medial temporal lobes (MTL), pre-
dicted later memory performance. Specifically, activity was 
greater for information that was subsequently remembered 
accurately as part of the original witnessed event compared 
with information that was subsequently misremembered 
(misleading information later inaccurately attributed to the 
original event). The authors suggested that this increased 
activity during exposure to misinformation might reflect 
enhanced source encoding, particularly when participants 
notice discrepancies with information presented in the origi-
nal event phase, which reduces source misattribution during 
the final memory test. Indeed, previous behavioral work has 
indicated that detecting discrepancies or changes between 
an original Witnessed Event and Post-Event Information can 
reduce the misinformation effect (Tousignant et al., 1986; 
Putnam et al., 2017). By this logic, prewarnings could pro-
tect memory from misinformation by “tagging” discrepant 
misleading information with the source or context in which 
it was presented (enhanced source encoding).
Prewarnings also could have more global effects on 
how Post-Event Information is processed: for example, by 
reducing attention or by causing shallower processing of

442

this information. Support for this proposal comes from a 
previous fMRI study by Baym & Gonsalves (2010), which 
investigated neural activity during exposure to verbal mis-
information about a previous event. In this study, activity in 
default mode regions (e.g., precuneus/cuneus, anterior/pos-
terior cingulate) during exposure to Post-Event Information 
was associated with accurate memory decisions in later tests 
of memory. Thus, prewarnings could have multiple potential 
effects on the processing of Post-Event Information.
Current Study
While neuroimaging evidence is limited, the previous mis-
information literature suggests that encoding-related pro-
cesses during exposure to Post-Event Information influence 
subsequent memory performance. An important outstand-
ing question is whether, and how, warnings modulate these 
encoding-related processes to improve memory accuracy. To 
investigate this question, the current study assessed the effect 
of prewarnings on neural activity during the Post-Event 
Information phase in the fMRI study previously reported 
by Karanian & colleagues (Karanian et al., 2020). Whereas 
the previous fMRI analyses presented by Karanian & col-
leagues (Karanian et al., 2020) exclusively focused on neural 
activity during memory retrieval (Final Memory Test), the 
present study investigates neural activity during exposure to 
misleading information (the Post-Event Information phase). 
In this paradigm, participants watched a silent crime video 
(Witnessed Event), took an initial memory test about the 
video, and then listened to a narrative that contained mis-
leading details, consistent details, and neutral details (Post-
Event Information). Finally, participants took a Final Mem-
ory Test, which asked them to remember details about the 
original Witnessed Event. Participants either were warned 
about the reliability of the Post-Event Information before 
exposure to it (prewarning), after exposure to it (postwarn-
ing), or did not receive a warning (no warning). The current 
study focused exclusively on data from the prewarning and 
no warning conditions given our interest in investigating the 
effect of warning on neural processing during the Post-Event 
Information and the relationship between such neural pro-
cessing and performance on the Final Memory Test. Because 
a warning is administered after the Post-Event Information 
phase in the postwarning condition, it is problematic to 
make any inferences about the relationship between neural 
processing during the Post-Event Information and the Final 
Memory Test.
Hypotheses If prewarnings modulate processing of Post-
Event Information, then we would expect to find neural 
activity differences between the prewarning and no warning 
groups during the Post-Event Information phase. Based on 
the previous literature, we had two primary hypotheses. We 
first posited that prewarnings might encourage encoding of 
the context/source of information presented during the Post-
Event Information, particularly when that information has 
been changed or conflicts with information presented in the 
original event (i.e., misleading information) (Green et al., 
1982; Okado & Stark, 2005). According to this “enhanced 
source encoding” hypothesis, warned participants might be 
more likely to tag (or encode) misleading Post-Event Infor-
mation with contextual or source information, which would 
help them to later disambiguate between information that 
came from accurate (Witnessed Event) versus inaccurate 
(Post-Event Information) sources during the Final Memory 
Test. If this is the case, then prewarnings should increase 
activity in regions that have been associated with detecting 
conflict (e.g., ACC; Carter & Van Veen, 2007) as well as 
regions associated with the encoding of contextual or source 
information into memory (e.g., inferior prefrontal cortex and 
MTL; Cansino et al., 2002; Krebs et al., 2015; for reviews, 
see Paller & Wagner, 2002; Kim, 2011). Second, we hypoth-
esized that prewarnings could also improve memory accu-
racy by reducing processing of the Post-Event Information 
at a more global level—for example, as a result of not paying 
as much attention to that information (Baym & Gonsalves, 
2010). According to this “attenuated processing” hypothesis, 
reduced attention to and processing of the Post-Event Infor-
mation could lead to a less robust memory representation of 
the Post-Event Information and, in turn, reduce the likeli-
hood of retrieving misleading details on the final memory 
test. If this is the case, the prewarning group should dem-
onstrate decreased activity across trials in the Post-Event 
Information phase in brain regions associated with sensory 
perceptual (i.e., auditory cortex) or attentional processing 
(e.g., frontoparietal network). Attenuated processing of the 
Post-Event Information in the prewarning group also could 
be associated with increased activity in default mode regions 
(Baym & Gonsalves, 2010).
Materials and methods
Participants
Eighty adult participants aged 18–35 years were recruited 
from the Boston area and were compensated $20/hour for 
participation. All participants were right-handed, native 
English speakers, had normal or corrected-to-normal vision, 
and reported no history of traumatic head injury. Fifteen 
participants were excluded in total: 11 participants were 
excluded before fMRI analysis because of technical prob-
lems during scanning, three participants were excluded 
because of noncompliance during the scanning session (e.g., 
falling asleep), and one participant was excluded for being 
outside the target age range (aged >35 years). This yielded

443
a final sample of 65 participants (No Warning: n = 22, Pre-
warning: n = 21, Postwarning, n = 22; Mage = 24, SD = 4; 
57% female). However, only individuals in the No Warning 
(n = 22) and Prewarning (n = 21) groups were included 
in the present analyses given the scope of this paper. All 
participants provided informed consent in accordance with 
the procedures of the institutional review board at Tufts 
University.
Stimuli
Witnessed Event During the encoding period, participants 
viewed a 22-min video clip from the black and white silent 
film Rififi (Bezard et al., 1955). The video depicts the events 
surrounding a burglary of a jewelry store and contains no 
dialogue.
Initial Memory Test Participants’ memory for the 24 criti-
cal details from the witnessed event (Witnessed Event) 
was assessed in a four alternative forced choice recogni-
tion memory test. The 24 questions were presented, one at 
a time, and each asked about a critical detail from the wit-
nessed event. Critical details were probed in chronological 
order (e.g., the same order in which they appeared in the 
video). Four alternative answers were displayed below each 
question and consisted of the correct detail shown in the 
video, a misleading detail, and two highly plausible lures 
(as determined by pilot testing). The order of answers was 
randomized across participants. Each question was displayed 
for 7 s, during which participants made their memory deci-
sions, followed by a 500-ms blank screen. Then, participants 
were given 3 s to indicate their level of confidence via on 
a ordinal scale that ranged from 1–4 with 1 representing 
guess/low confidence and 4 representing high confidence. 
A jittered interstimulus interval with an average of 8 s was 
inserted between each memory question. Participants made a 
left/right button press, indicating the direction of a series of 
arrows. For the initial memory test, the test was presented on 
a laptop and all button presses were made on the keyboard 
(Karanian et al., 2020).
Post Event Information An auditory narrative synopsis 
of the witnessed event was recorded by a female speaker 
(Karanian et al., 2020). Twenty-four sentences contained 
critical details that would be probed during the memory 
tests. These sentences either (1) accurately described a 
detail from the witnessed event (consistent) (e.g., “A rope 
is secured to an umbrella”), (2) inaccurately described 
a detail from the witnessed event (misleading) (e.g., “A 
rope is secured to a bucket”), or (3) provided an alternative 
(neither consistent nor inconsistent) detail from the 
witnessed event (neutral) (e.g., “A rope is secured to an 
object”). Critical details always appeared at the end of the 
sentence. An equal number of critical sentences contained 
consistent, neutral, or misleading details. Critical sentences 
were separated by at least three filler sentences that were 
not probed in the subsequent tests of memory. Each 
critical detail appeared only once during the narrative and 
the assignment of each detail to the consistent, neutral, 
or misleading condition was counterbalanced across 
participants. A jittered interstimulus interval with an 
average of 6 s (range 4–8 s) was inserted between each 
sentence during which a series of arrows pointing left or 
right was presented. Participants made a left/right button 
press indicating the direction of the arrows on a button 
box. In addition, because of a coding error, one sentence 
near the end of the narrative appeared three times (once 
in each condition) for a subset of participants (n = 24). 
Behavioral analyses showed no differences in response 
patterns between participants who did and did not hear this 
erroneous item. Thus, we have no reason to believe that it 
had a meaningful effect on the present data. Nonetheless, 
this item was omitted from the behavioral and imaging 
data. 
Final Memory Test The content of the final memory test 
was identical to that described above for the initial memory 
test. However, the final memory test was completed while 
participants were in the fMRI scanner. Accordingly, the 
final memory test was presented on the in-scanner projector 
screen and all responses were made on a MRI-compatible 
button box (Karanian et al., 2020).
Procedure
The experiment consisted of four stages: a video of a 
witnessed event, an initial memory test, an audio narrative 
recounting the witnessed event that included misleading 
details, and a final memory test (Karanian et al., 2020). 
Participants watched the video clip of the witnessed event 
on a computer monitor outside the scanner. Immediately 
following the video, participants were administered the 
first memory test on a laptop computer before entering the 
MRI scanner. Then, participants entered the scanner and 
both the audio narrative and the final memory test occurred 
while brain images were acquired. Participants listened to 
the audio narrative through MRI-compatible earphones 
and viewed the final memory test questions on an overhead 
mirror that contained the image of a screen onto which the 
questions were projected. Participants were instructed to 
minimize movement as much as possible during scanning 
and indicated their responses on a button box. Participants 
were randomly assigned to no warning, prewarning (warned 
before the audio narrative), or postwarning (warned after 
the audio narrative) conditions. As described earlier, the 
primary manipulation of interest in the present study was

444

whether participants received a warning about the veracity 
of the Post-Event Information before it was presented 
(prewarning) or not at all (no warning).
Before the Post-Event Information, participants in 
the prewarning condition were provided the following 
instructions: “You will have to answer questions regarding 
the video you previously watched for a second time. We will 
play a narrative of that video; however, we are uncertain 
as to the source of the narrative. Therefore, we were unable 
to verify the accuracy of the narrative. As such, base your 
answers only on what you saw in the video, and not on 
what you hear in the narrative. During the narrative, 
please keep your eyes fixed on the cross on the screen.” 
Alternatively, participants in the no warning condition 
were provided the following instructions before the Post-
Event Information: "You will now hear an audio narrative 
of the video you just watched. During the narrative, please 
keep your eyes fixed on the cross on the screen.” Both 
the no warning and prewarning conditions were provided 
the following instructions before the Final Memory Test: 
"You will now answer a series of questions relating to the 
video you watched at the beginning of this experiment. 
Please answer each question to the best of your ability. 
If you do not know the answer, make your best guess. All 
questions must be answered. Select your answer using the 
numbers and then wait for the screen to advance. After 
each question, please rate your confidence in your answer 
on a scale from 1, complete guess to 4, high confidence.” 
Task instructions and warnings for all conditions can be 
found in Appendix A.
Behavioral analysis
Behavioral results are a subset of those previously reported 
in Karanian et al. (2020), restricted to comparison of 
prewarning and no warning groups. Recognition memory 
performance on the initial and final memory tests was 
calculated by dividing the total number of trials in which 
participants selected a correct video detail by the total 
number of trials for that given item type (consistent, neutral, 
misleading). Misinformation selection (a term that can be 
used interchangeably with “misinformation endorsement”) 
was calculated as the proportion of misleading trials in 
which participants selected the misleading detail that had 
been inaccurately described in the auditory narrative. 
This terminology has been used in recent studies using 
misinformation paradigms with recognition tests (O’Donnell 
& Chan, 2023; Karanian et al., 2020). As a baseline 
comparison, we also counted the proportion of consistent 
and neutral trials in which participants spontaneously 
selected a misleading detail (that had not been mentioned 
in the auditory narrative).
MRI data collection and preprocessing
Structural and functional images were acquired on a Sie-
mens 3T Magnetom Prisma Fit scanner (Siemens Medical, 
Erlangen, Germany) with a 32-channel head coil at the MIT 
Athinoula A. Martinos Imaging Center. Functional data 
were acquired using a T2*-weighted echo-planar imaging 
sequence (TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, flip angle = 90o, 
field-of-view = 210 x 210 mm, matrix = 64 x 64, slice thick-
ness = 3.0 mm). Forty axial slices parallel to the AC-PC 
line were obtained. High-resolution structural images of the 
whole brain were acquired by using a T1-weighted, rapid 
gradient echo pulse sequence (MPRAGE; TR = 1800 ms, 
TE = 2.36 ms, flip angle = 8o, field-of-view = 250 x 250 
mm, slice thickness = 0.87 mm; 208 slices, 0.9- x 0.9- x 
0.9-mm resolution; Karanian et al., 2020).
Image preprocessing and data analysis was performed 
by using SPM12 (Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neu-
rology, London, UK). Functional volumes for each par-
ticipant were slice-time corrected with the middle slice in 
time used as a reference and corrected for head motion. The 
T1-weighted anatomical volume was coregistered to the 
functional data and segmented into gray and white matter. 
Segmented images were used to calculate spatial normaliza-
tion parameters to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) 
space, which were then applied to the functional data. As 
part of spatial normalization, data were resampled to 2 x 2 x 
2 mm. Functional images were then spatially smoothed with 
a 4-mm FWHM Gaussian kernel (Karanian et al., 2020).
fMRI analysis
Functional data from the Post-Event Information phase in 
which participants listened to the audio narrative were ana-
lyzed by using a general linear model (GLM), including sep-
arate regressors each of the following: consistent trials, neu-
tral trials, misleading trials, arrows task (baseline), and six 
nuisance regressors for each of the motion correction param-
eters. Trials were modeled as epochs defined by the onsets 
and duration (4 s) of each sentence of the narrative and were 
convolved with the canonical hemodynamic response func-
tion. A high-pass filter of 1/128 Hz was applied to remove 
low-frequency noise. Contrasts of interest were computed 
for each participant at the single-subject level and subjected 
to a random effects (second-level) GLM analysis to investi-
gate the effect of warning (prewarning vs. no warning). We 
first examined whether warnings increased neural activity 
during exposure to misinformation by comparing activity 
in the prewarning versus no warning group on misleading 
trials (Misleading – Arrows). Next, we examined whether 
warnings had a more global effect on processing across all 
trials during the Post-Event Information phase by comparing 
activity in the prewarning versus no warning group across

445
all trials, which includes both the 24 critical trials as well as 
the filler sentences (All Trials – Arrows).
fMRI statistical analysis
Whole-brain contrasts of interest were performed to inves-
tigate differences between the two warning conditions: 
prewarning and no warning. We employed an individual 
voxel threshold of p < 0.005, and Monte Carlo simulations 
were used to determine a cluster extent of k = 38 to cor-
rect for multiple comparisons to p < .05 (https://​www2.​bc.​
edu/​sd-​slotn​ick/​scrip​ts.​htm; 1,000 iterations, full width at 
half maximum = 6 mm; Kark et al., 2020; Slotnick, 2023, 
Slotnick et al., 2003). We primarily focus on the activations 
that exceeded the corrected minimum cluster size of k = 38. 
However, for completeness and to minimize Type II error, 
we also report significant regions with a cluster size of k = 
10 in the Supplemental Results.
Beta-weights were extracted from each cluster of activ-
ity and entered into 2 x 3 mixed ANOVAs to assess the 
effect of condition (prewarning, no warning) and trial type 
(consistent, neutral, misleading). Post hoc independent sam-
ple t-tests were conducted when warranted. Beta weights 
extracted from these activations were used to assess the rela-
tionship to behavior. Specifically, two-tailed Pearson corre-
lations assessed the relationship between activation and later 
susceptibility to misinformation during the final memory 
task (i.e., memory accuracy on misleading trials).
We also conducted targeted analyses of neural activity in 
a priori regions of interest in the MTL, including the hip-
pocampus and the parahippocampal cortex (Okado & Stark, 
2005). Anatomical ROIs were drawn from the AAL ana-
tomical atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002) by using the 
WFU PickAtlas. Beta weights from these anatomical ROIs 
were then extracted from the contrasts of interest to assess 
whether there were differences based on warning condi-
tion. Two-tailed Pearson correlations were again conducted 
to assess the relationship between activation and memory 
accuracy on misleading trials on the final memory test.
Results
Behavioral results
Behavioral results have been previously reported by Kara-
nian & colleagues (Karanian et al., 2020) but are summa-
rized here to highlight comparison of the prewarning and 
no warning groups. Table 1 includes means and standard 
errors by condition and trial type for each dependent variable 
reported below (accuracy, misinformation selection, confi-
dence, reaction time).
On the final memory test, a strong misinformation effect 
was observed across all participants such that accuracy was 
reduced for misleading trials (M = .48), relative to neutral 
trials (M = .63) and consistent trials (M = .80; F(2, 82) = 
32.95, p < .001, n2
p = .45; Fig. 1). Importantly, there was a 
significant interaction between trial type (consistent, neutral, 
misleading) and warning condition (no warning, prewarning) 
(F(2, 82) = 6.09, p < .005, n2
p = .13), whereby prewarnings 
improved memory accuracy on misleading trials (t(41) = 
3.12, p < .003, d = .95) at no cost to memory accuracy on 
consistent trials (t(41) < 1) or neutral trials (t(41) < 1).
Prewarning similarly reduced misinformation selection 
across all trials during the final memory test (F(2, 82) = 4.86 
, p = .03, n2
p = 0.2). More specifically, prewarning reduced 
the likelihood of selecting misinformation on misleading 
trails (t(41) = 3.83, p < .001, d = 1.17) but did not affect the 
likelihood of selecting misinformation on consistent (t(41) 
= 1.7, p > .05) or neutral (t(41) > 1) trials during the final 
memory test. As anticipated, accuracy on misleading trials 
and misinformation selection showed a strong negative cor-
relation (r = −0.79, p < .001, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
[−0.64, −0.88]).
There was no effect of warning or trial type on reaction 
time during the final memory test (F(2, 82) = 2.25, p > .05). 
Although there was an interaction between warning and trial 
type on confidence ratings (F(2,82) = 3.19, p < .05, n2
p = 
.07), post-hoc t-tests revealed no differences in confidence 
between groups on consistent (t(41) = 1.59, p > .05), mis-
leading (t(41) = 1.44, p > .05), or neutral trials (t(41) < 
1). As anticipated, there was a significant main effect of 
trial type (F(2, 82) = 29.24, p < .001, n2
p = .42) such that 
confidence was significantly higher on consistent trials (M 
= 3.38) compared with misleading trials (M = 3.23, t(41) 
Table 1 Behavioral results. Average proportion correct, misinforma-
tion selection, confidence, and reaction time as a function of trial type 
(consistent, neutral, misleading) and warning condition (no warning, 
prewarning) during the final memory test
Note: Means and standard errors are reported
Consistent
Neutral
Misleading
No warning (N = 22)
 Accuracy
0.82 (0.05)
0.63 (0.06)
0.37 (0.05)
 Selection
0.04 (0.02)
0.18 (0.04)
0.52 (0.04)
 Confidence
3.49 (0.10)
2.84 (0.07)
3.32 (0.08)
 Reaction 
time
6152.54 (51.17) 6282.84 (52.09) 6160.09 (44.64)
Prewarning (N = 21)
 Accuracy
0.78 (0.05)
0.64 (0.05)
0.59 (0.05)
 Selection
0.09 (0.02)
0.20 (0.03)
0.29 (0.05)
 Confidence
3.27 (0.10)
2.93 (0.10)
3.14 (0.10)
 Reaction 
time
6106.44 (48.75) 6175.41 (48.75) 6243.10 (48.75)

446

= 2.24, p < .05, d = .34) and neutral trials (M = 2.88, t(41) 
= 7.45, p < .001, d = 1.14), and confidence on misleading 
trials was significant greater than neutral trials (t(41) = 5.21, 
p < .001, d = .80).
fMRI results
Enhanced Source Encoding Hypothesis
We first examined whether prewarnings increase encoding-
related neural activity during exposure to misinformation by 
comparing activity in the prewarning versus the no warning 
groups on misleading trials. Activity was greater in the pre-
warning compared with the no warning group in the right 
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; BA 44; x = 48, y = 18, z = 
8) (Fig. 2A). Follow-up analysis revealed that this activity 
difference between groups was specific to the misleading 
trails (Fig. 2B). Specifically, parameter estimates extracted 
from this region were entered into a condition (prewarning, 
no warning) by trial type (consistent, neutral, misleading) 
repeated-measures ANOVA (Fig. 2B), revealing a signifi-
cant effect of condition (F(1,41) = 9.89, p = .003, n2
p = 
.19) and a significant interaction between condition and trial 
type (F(2, 82) = 3.91, p = .024, n2
p = .09), with no effect 
of trial type (F < 1). Post hoc independent samples t-test 
revealed that this pattern was driven by a significant increase 
in activity on misleading trials in the prewarning group (M 
= 0.34) compared with the no warning group (M = −0.24; 
t(41) = 4.71, p < .001, d = 1.44). There were no significant 
differences between groups on neutral trials (t(41) = 1.75, p 
= .09) or consistent trials (t(41) < 1).
We next assessed the relationship between right IFG 
activity and susceptibility to misinformation on the final 
memory test (accuracy on misleading trials) across individ-
uals (collapsing across warning conditions). A significant 
positive correlation was observed between activity in right 
IFG and memory accuracy on misleading trials (r = 0.42, p 
= .005, 95% CI [0.14, 0.64]; Fig. 2C). Importantly, there was 
not a relationship between this frontal activity and accuracy 
on consistent trials (p = 0.25) or neutral trials (p = .45). 
Furthermore, we confirmed a similar pattern was observed 
between right IFG activity and the rate of misinformation 
selection on misleading trials (r = −0.29, p = .06, 95% CI 
[−0.54, 0.01]). This pattern is expected given the strong 
negative correlation between accuracy on misleading trials 
and the rate of misinformation selection on misleading trials 
described above.
Exploratory follow-up analysis with a more lenient clus-
ter threshold of k = 10 (see Materials and methods) revealed 
seven additional activations (Supplemental Table 1A; Sup-
plemental Fig. 1). Of note, a cluster was observed in one 
of our a priori predicted regions, anterior cingulate cortex, 
which displayed a similar pattern to the right IFG clus-
ter across trial types. Specifically, there was a significant 
Fig. 1 Behavioral results from the final memory test. Proportion cor-
rect refers to the proportion of trials within each trial type (consistent, 
neutral, misleading) that were answered correctly (i.e., the number of 
trials in which participants selected the correct video detail divided 
by the total number of trials within that trial type). Error bars indicate 
between-participant SEs. *p < 0.001

447
interaction between condition and trial type (F(2, 82) = 4.89, 
p = .010, n2
p = .107) and significant effect of condition (F(1, 
41) = 4.205, p = .047, n2
p = .093) which was driven by an 
increase in activity specifically on misleading trials in the 
prewarning group (t (41) = 3.37, p = .002, d = 1.03). Like 
activity in right IFG, activity in the ACC also showed a 
positive relationship with memory accuracy on misleading 
trials, although it did not reach statistical significance (r = 
.252, p = .103, 95% CI [−0.052, 0.513].
ROI analysis Given our a priori predictions about potential 
group differences in the MTL, we performed an ROI anal-
ysis of activity in the hippocampus and parahippocampal 
cortex during misleading trails. No group differences were 
observed in left hippocampus (t(41) = 0.23, p = 0.82) or 
right hippocampus (t(41) = −0.85, p = 0.40). Similarly, no 
group differences were observed in left parahippocampal 
cortex (t(41) = 1.03, p = 0.31) or right parahippocampal 
cortex (t(41) = −0.36, p = .73). No group differences were 
observed in any of these regions on consistent trials (ps > 
.26) or neutral trials (ps > .29).
Attenuated Processing Hypothesis
We next explored whether prewarnings might have a more 
global influence on neural activity during the Post-Event 
Information phase across all trials (e.g., attenuated process-
ing) by comparing activity in the no warning versus the pre-
warning groups across all trials. Activity was reduced in the 
prewarning compared to the no warning group across all tri-
als in a single cluster falling in the left dorsolateral prefron-
tal cortex (dlPFC; BA 46; x = −40, y = 38 , z = 0; Fig. 3A). 
There was a significant main effect of condition (prewarn-
ings, no warning; (F(1, 41) = 17.68, p < .001, n2
p = .30) and 
no main effect of trial type (F < 1) nor interaction between 
condition and trial type (F < 1). A post hoc independent 
samples t-test revealed that activity was significantly greater 
for prewarned compared to unwarned participants on con-
sistent (t (41) = 3.12, p = .003, d = .95), misleading (t (41) 
= 3.40, p = .002, d = 1.04), and neutral (t (41) = 4.33, p < 
.001, d = 1.32) trials (Fig. 3B).
We next assessed whether the magnitude of this activity 
in left dlPFC region during misleading trials was related 
Fig. 2 Whole Brain: Prewarning > No Warning. (A) Frontal activa-
tion was revealed by the contrast of prewarning > no warning for 
Misleading Trials – Baseline. (B) Extracted beta weights are plotted 
by trial type and condition. (C) Collapsing across warning condition, 
extracted beta weights are plotted in relation to accuracy on mislead-
ing trials on the final memory test

448

to memory accuracy on the final memory test across par-
ticipants (collapsing across warning conditions). Indeed, a 
significant correlation was observed (r = −0.32, p = .036, 
95% CI [−0.57, −0.02]; Fig. 3C), whereby reduced activ-
ity in left dlPFC was positively associated with protection 
from misinformation (i.e., memory accuracy on misleading 
trials). We again confirmed a similar pattern between left 
dlPFC activity and the rate of misinformation selection on 
misleading trials (r = 0.36, p = .02, 95% CI [0.07, 0.60]). 
This pattern is expected given the strong negative correlation 
between accuracy on misleading trials and the rate of mis-
information selection on misleading trials described above.
An exploratory follow-up analysis with a more lenient 
cluster threshold of k = 10 (see Methods) revealed two 
additional clusters (Supplemental Table 1B; Supplemental 
Fig. 2). Given our hypotheses, a cluster in auditory cortex 
(BA 22, k = 31) was of particular interest. This region dis-
played a significant main effect of condition (F (1, 41) = 
12.443, p < .001, n2
p = .23) but no main effect of trial type 
(F < 1) nor was there an interaction between condition and 
trial type (F < 1). Post hoc t-tests revealed that activity was 
significantly reduced for prewarned compared with post-
warned participants across consistent (t (41) = 3.48, p < 
.001, d = 1.07), misleading (t (41) = 3.35, p = .002, d = 
1.02), and neutral (t (41) = 3.16, p = .003, d = .96) trials.
Given that attenuated processing could also be evident 
by increased activity in the default mode network (Baym & 
Gonsalves, 2010), we also performed a whole-brain analy-
sis to identify regions where activity might be greater in 
the prewarning compared to the no warning group across 
all trials. No clusters survived correction for multiple com-
parisons (p < .005, k = 38), but an exploratory follow-up 
analysis with a more lenient cluster threshold of k = 10 (see 
Materials and methods) revealed clusters in visual areas 
(BA 18, BA 37) as well as parietal regions (BA 7, BA 40) 
(Supplemental Table 1C; Supplemental Fig. 3). Condition 
(prewarning, no warning) by trial type (consistent, neutral, 
misleading) mixed ANOVAs revealed a significant effect of 
warning (ps < .01) with no interaction (ps > .37) or effect 
of trial type (ps > .11).
Fig. 3 Whole Brain: Prewarning < No Warning. (A) Frontal activa-
tion was revealed by the contrast of prewarnings < no warning for 
All Trials – Baseline. (B) Extracted beta weights from the region are 
plotted by trial type and condition. (C) Collapsing across warning 
condition, extracted beta weights are plotted in relation to accuracy 
on misleading trials on the final memory test

449
Discussion
Previous research has demonstrated that warnings about the 
threat of misinformation can alter the manner in which that 
information is retrieved, thereby improving the accuracy of 
memory reports. The present study is the first, to our knowl-
edge, to identify the neural mechanisms by which warnings 
impact encoding-related processes during initial exposure 
to misinformation. We had two primary hypotheses, both 
of which were supported by the data. First, based on pre-
vious literature (Okado & Stark, 2005), we hypothesized 
that prewarnings could protect memory from misinforma-
tion by increasing neural activity in regions associated with 
source encoding during exposure to misleading information 
that conflicts with an original event. Congruent with our 
hypothesis, we found that compared to unwarned partici-
pants, warned participants demonstrated increased activity 
in lateral prefrontal regions (BA 44) associated with source 
encoding (Cansino et al., 2002) as well as anterior cingulate 
regions associated with the detection of conflict (Carter & 
Van Veen, 2007). Importantly, a positive relationship was 
observed between activity in these regions and protection 
from misinformation on the final memory test (subsequent 
memory accuracy on misleading trials). These results align 
with findings in the fMRI literature that conflict-triggered 
attention mediated by the ACC and lateral PFC can enhance 
memory encoding and predict subsequent retrieval accuracy 
(Krebs et al., 2015) as well as findings in the misinforma-
tion literature that noticing discrepancies or changes between 
an original event and post-event information can lead to 
improved memory accuracy for the original event (Tousig-
nant et al., 1986; Putnam et al., 2017).
Second, we hypothesized that prewarnings could pro-
tect memory from misinformation by encouraging shal-
lower processing of the Post-Event Information at the more 
global level (“attenuated processing hypothesis”; Baym & 
Gonsalves, 2010). In support of this hypothesis, we found 
that participants who received a prewarning had reduced 
activity in the left dlPFC (BA 46) across all trials in the 
Post-Event Information phase. Such global decreases in 
left dlPFC activity across trials may be a marker of over-
all reduced attention to, and processing of, the verbal nar-
rative in prewarned participants as compared to unwarned 
participants (for a review, see Kim, 2011). In support of this 
interpretation, exploratory analysis revealed that activity in 
auditory cortex (BA 22) was also reduced in the prewarning 
group across trials during the post-event auditory narrative. 
Importantly, activity in left dlPFC was negatively correlated 
with subsequent memory performance on misleading trials, 
suggesting that reduced activity in this region may play a 
role in protecting memory from misinformation. While the 
above-discussed results support the attenuated processing 
hypothesis, it is important to note that we did not find any 
difference in memory performance between warning groups 
on consistent or neutral trials on the Final Memory Test, 
which suggests that the prewarned participants still pro-
cessed the Post-Event Information to some degree. It is also 
worth noting that we did not observe increased activity in the 
default mode network in the prewarning group, which could 
have provided additional evidence in support of the attenu-
ated processing hypothesis (Baym & Gonsalves, 2010).
As described earlier, a prominent explanation for 
the misinformation effect is source misattribution at 
the time of memory retrieval. A number of theoretical 
models have been proposed to explain the underlying 
mechanism by which such source misattribution errors 
occur. The multiple trace model (Nadel & Moscovitch, 
1997; Shao et al., 2023) predicts that representations of the 
Witnessed Event and Post-Event Information would exist 
independently, and misinformation errors occur when the 
wrong trace is accessed/selected during the Final Memory 
Test. Additionally, in a recent study, Bulevich et al. (2022) 
suggested that warnings may promote greater contextual 
discrimination between two highly accessible sources 
of information. Memory opposition tests (McClosky & 
Zaragoza, 1985) and modified opposition tests (Eakin et al., 
2003) used in misinformation paradigms have consistently 
demonstrated that original information and the source 
of that information remains accessible, and the cause of 
misinformation selection, or source misattributions, may 
stem from memory trace confusion. Most recently, Shao & 
colleagues (Shao et al., 2023) employed a misinformation 
paradigm in which participants viewed visual scenes 
(Witnessed Event), were exposed to written summaries of 
what they saw but with some details altered (Post-Event 
Information), and then completed a Final Memory Test. 
In testing this theory, Shao and colleagues found that 
the hippocampus maintained distinct traces of both the 
Witnessed Event and the Post-Event Information during 
encoding of the Post Event Information. Furthermore, they 
found that misinformation errors on the Final Memory Test 
were more likely to occur when the hippocampal trace for the 
Post-Event Information was stronger than the hippocampal 
trace for the Witnessed Event. Similarly suggesting that 
multiple traces exist at the time of memory retrieval, 
Karanian & colleagues (Karanian et al., 2020) demonstrated 
that warnings about the reliability of Post-Event Information 
encouraged reinstatement of the Witnessed Event during the 
Final Memory Test, thereby leading to fewer misinformation 
errors. Specifically, compared with unwarned participants, 
warned participants were more likely to reinstate the 
Witnessed Event, as indicated by greater visual activity 
during memory retrieval, and were less likely to reinstate 
the Post-Event Information, as indicated by less auditory

450

activity during memory retrieval. These results suggest that 
external manipulations, such as warnings, can facilitate 
selection of the proper source/trace at the time of memory 
retrieval, which provides support for the multiple trace 
theory.
In the present study, a primary finding was that prewarn-
ings enhanced activity in ventrolateral frontal regions associ-
ated with source encoding during the Post-Event Information 
phase and that the magnitude of this activity was positively 
associated with performance on the final memory test, such 
that greater activity during misinformation exposure was 
associated with fewer source misattribution errors. These 
results are consistent with the idea that a distinct memory 
trace is maintained for Post-Event Information. Our current 
findings further suggest that that if prewarnings make source 
encoding stronger, then this could lead to a better ability to 
disambiguate between sources of information on the final 
memory test. It is worth mentioning that the above-discussed 
results refute other models, including the altered trace theory 
(Loftus et al., 1978), which suggests the Post-Event Infor-
mation trace overwrites/alters the Witnessed Event thereby 
making some of the original accurate details inaccessible at 
the time of the Final Memory Test.
At first pass, it may seem puzzling that warnings appeared 
to enhance activity associated with source encoding on mis-
leading trials as well as attenuate activity associated with 
sensory processing and attention more globally across tri-
als. However, one possibility is that both mechanisms work 
in parallel to ultimately reduce source misattributions dur-
ing the Final Memory Test. Specifically, whereas warnings 
may reduce processing of the Post-Event Information at the 
global level, warnings also could increase the detection of 
discrepancies between Post-Event Information and memory 
for the Witnessed Event (i.e., on misleading trials). In turn, 
this could enhance item-related source encoding whereby 
misleading details are tagged with contextual informa-
tion so that they can be disambiguated from original event 
details in memory. This idea is consistent with hypothesized 
recall-to-reject processes that have been found to facilitate 
the rejection of test foils that are similar to studied stimuli 
(Gronlund & Ratcliff, 1989; Clark & Gronlund, 1996). 
Recall-to-reject processes operate by detecting traces that 
are retrieved from memory that are possible targets. This 
process uses information about a recalled item specifically 
to reject another. Although speculative, this could suggest 
that warnings have multiple effects on encoding-related pro-
cessing during exposure to misinformation. In support of 
this possibility, a secondary analysis using stepwise linear 
regression found that activity in right IFG on misleading tri-
als significantly predicted memory performance (R2 = .19, 
F (1, 41) = 9.70, p = .003) and that adding activity in left 
dlPFC to the second step of the model improved its capacity 
to account for variance in susceptibility to misinformation 
(memory accuracy on misleading trials; R2 change = .10, F 
(1, 40) = 5.39, p = .025).
The results of our exploratory whole brain analyses also 
revealed interesting patterns that might provide insight into 
the underlying mechanisms by which warnings protect 
memory from misinformation. In addition to reducing activ-
ity in auditory processing areas (BA 22) across all trials of 
the Post-Event Information phase, warnings also increased 
activity in visual processing regions (BA 18, BA 37). Given 
that the trials presented during the Post Event Information 
were purely auditory, it is plausible that such increases in 
visual activity in prewarned participants reflects sensory 
reinstatement of the Witnessed Event, which was presented 
visually (Wheeler et al., 2000; Karanian et al., 2020). Such 
reinstatement of the Witnessed Event may reflect increased 
source monitoring during the Post-Event Information, which 
could ultimately allow participants to better avoid source 
misattribution at the time of memory retrieval. While specu-
lative, support for this possibility comes from the finding 
that the magnitude of this visual activity positively corre-
lated with later memory performance on misleading trials. 
Accordingly, one post hoc explanation is that the memory 
benefit observed in the prewarned group during the Final 
Memory Test is not primarily driven by attenuated process-
ing of Post-Event Information, but instead by enhanced 
encoding processes that involve actively comparing details 
from the Post-Event Information to details from the original 
Witnessed Event. This is an avenue for further research.
There are several factors that make the present study 
distinct from the previous fMRI literature. First, to our 
knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the impacts 
of warning on neural activity during exposure to misinfor-
mation. While previous studies have investigated neural 
activity during exposure to misinformation and its relation-
ship to subsequent memory (Okado & Stark, 2005; Baym 
& Gonsalves, 2010; Shao et al., 2023), no study to date has 
investigated the effects of warnings on such encoding-related 
activity. As is typical in misinformation paradigms, partici-
pants can only be exposed to limited amount of misinforma-
tion during the Post-Event Information phase. Despite the 
small number of misleading trials in the present study, we 
were able to identify effects of prewarning and relate such 
activity to subsequent memory performance on misleading 
trials. Future warning studies could attempt to increase the 
number of misleading trials during Post-Event Information 
phase to conduct a standard subsequent memory analysis in 
which misleading trials could be parsed into subsequently 
remembered and subsequently forgotten categories and the 
effects of warning could also be examined. It also is impor-
tant to note that the present paradigm employed a repeated 
testing procedure such that participants engaged in memory

451
retrieval before exposure to misinformation. A number of 
studies on repeated testing suggests that engaging in retrieval 
affects susceptibility to subsequently encountered misinfor-
mation. It should be underscored that this paradigm differ-
ence makes it difficult to directly compare the results of the 
present study and previous fMRI misinformation studies 
(Okado & Stark, 2005; Baym & Gonsalves, 2010; Shao 
et al., 2023). Future studies would benefit from manipulating 
the number of retrieval attempts to better understand how 
repeated retrieval in the context of warnings affects neural 
processing of misinformation.
Conclusions
The present study assessed the effects of prewarnings on 
neural processing during exposure to Post-Event Infor-
mation. Consistent with previous literature, we find that 
prewarnings encouraged enhanced processing of source 
information during Post-Event Information, and such 
enhancement was associated with fewer misinformation 
errors on the final memory test. This work highlights the 
potential benefit of employing prewarnings in real-world 
contexts to protect eyewitness memory reports from the 
misinformation effect.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13415-​024-​01183-y.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Nat Rabb, Alia Wulff, McKinzey 
Torrance, Camille Carlisle, Jessica Jimbo, and the staff at the Martinos 
Imaging Center at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for assis-
tance with fMRI data collection.
Authors' contributions J.M.K., A.K.T., and E.R. designed research, 
J.M.K. A.K.T. and E.R. performed research, J.M.K. and E.R. analyzed 
data, and J.M.K., A.K.T., and E.R. wrote the paper.
Funding This material is based upon work supported by the National 
Science Foundation under Grant 1728764 and NIH under Shared 
Instrumentation Grant S10OD021569.
Availability of data and materials Data will be made available on OSF.
Code availability Not applicable
Declarations 
Conflicts of interest We have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
Competing interests Not applicable.
Ethics approval Appropriate ethics approval was obtained from Tufts 
University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Consent to participate Informed consent was obtained from all indi-
vidual participants included in the study.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Ayers, M. S., & Reder, L. M. (1998). A theoretical review of the mis-
information effect: Predictions from an activation-based memory 
model. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5(1), 1–21. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​3758/​BF032​09454
Baym, C. L., & Gonsalves, B. D. (2010). Comparison of neural activ-
ity that leads to true memories, false memories, and forgetting: 
An fMRI study of the misinformation effect. Cognitive, Affective, 
& Behavioral Neuroscience, 10(3), 339–348. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3758/​CABN.​10.3.​339
Bezard, H., Bérard, R., Cabaud, P, & Dassin, J (Director). (1955). Rififi 
[Film]. Pathé-Consortium Cinéma.
Blank, H., & Launay, C. (2014). How to protect eyewitness memory 
against the misinformation effect: A meta-analysis of post-warn-
ing studies. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cogni-
tion, 3(2), 77–88. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​h0101​798
Bulevich, J. B., Gordon, L. T., Hughes, G. I., & Thomas, A. K. (2022). 
Are witnesses able to avoid highly accessible misinformation? 
Examining the efficacy of different warnings for high and low 
accessibility postevent misinformation. Memory & Cognition, 50, 
45–58. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13421-​021-​01255-1
Cansino, S., Maquet, P., Dolan, R. J., & Rugg, M. D. (2002). Brain activity 
underlying encoding and retrieval of source memory. Cerebral Cor-
tex, 12(10), 1048–1056. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​cercor/​12.​10.​1048
Carter, C. S., & Van Veen, V. (2007). Anterior cingulate cortex and 
conflict detection: an update of theory and data. Cognitive, Affec-
tive, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7, 367–379. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3758/​CABN.7.​4.​367
Chan, J. C. K., & LaPaglia, J. A. (2011). The dark side of testing mem-
ory: Repeated retrieval can enhance eyewitness suggestibility. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(4), 418–432. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​a0025​147
Chan, J. C., Thomas, A. K., & Bulevich, J. B. (2009). Recalling a 
witnessed event increases eyewitness suggestibility: The reversed 
testing effect. Psychological Science, 20(1), 66–73. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1111/j.​1467-​9280.​2008.​02245.x
Clark, S. E., & Gronlund, S. D. (1996). Global matching models of rec-
ognition memory: How the models match the data. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 3, 37–60. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​BF032​10740
Eakin, D. K., Schreiber, T. A., & Sergent-Marshall, S. (2003). Misin-
formation effects in eyewitness memory: the presence and absence 
of memory impairment as a function of warning and misinforma-
tion accessibility. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 29(5), 813–825. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​
0278-​7393.​29.5.​813

452

Gallo, D. A., Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (2001). Asso-
ciative false recognition occurs without liberal criterion shifts. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 579–586. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
3758/​BF031​96194
Gordon, L. T., Thomas, A. K., & Bulevich, J. B. (2015). Looking for 
answers in all the wrong places: How testing facilitates learning of 
misinformation. Journal of Memory and Language, 83, 140–151. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jml.​2015.​03.​007
Greene, E., Flynn, M. S., & Loftus, E. F. (1982). Inducing resistance 
to misleading information. Journal of Verbal Learning & Ver-
bal Behavior, 21(2), 207–219. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0022-​
5371(82)​90571-0
Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Time course of item and asso-
ciative information: implications for global memory models. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, 15, 846–858. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0278-​7393.​15.5.​846
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source moni-
toring. Psychological Bulletin, 114(1), 3–28. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1037/​0033-​2909.​114.1.3
Karanian, J. M., Rabb, N., Wulff, A. N., Torrance, M. G., Thomas, 
A. K., & Race, E. (2020). Protecting memory from misinforma-
tion: Warnings modulate cortical reinstatement during memory 
retrieval. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 117(37), 22771–22779. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1073/​pnas.​20085​95117
Kark, S. M., Slotnick, S. D., & Kensinger, E. A. (2020). Forgotten but 
not gone: fMRI evidence of implicit memory for negative stimuli 
24 hours after the initial study episode. Neuropsychologia, 136, 
107277. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neuro​psych​ologia.​2019.​107277
Kim, H. (2011). Neural activity that predicts subsequent memory and 
forgetting: A meta-analysis of 74 fMRI studies. NeuroImage, 
54(3), 2446–2461. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neuro​image.​2010.​
09.​045
Krebs, R. M., Boehler, C. N., De Belder, M., & Egner, T. (2015). 
Neural conflict-control mechanisms improve memory for target 
stimuli. Cerebral Cortex, 25(3), 833–843. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​
cercor/​bht283
LaPaglia, J. A., & Chan, J. C. (2013). Testing increases suggestibility 
for narrative-based misinformation but reduces suggestibility for 
question-based misinformation. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 
31(5), 593–606. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bsl.​2090
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1989). The reversed eyewitness 
suggestibility effect. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 27(2), 
111–113. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​BF033​29912
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1989). The eyewitness suggestibil-
ity effect and memory for source. Memory & Cognition, 17(3), 
349–358. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​BF031​98473
Loftus, E. F. (2005). Planting misinformation in the human mind: A 
30-year investigation of the malleability of memory. Learning & 
Memory, 12(4), 361–366. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​lm.​94705
Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G., & Burns, H. J. (1978). Semantic integration 
of verbal information into a visual memory. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4(1), 19–31. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0278-​7393.4.​1.​19
McCloskey, M., & Zaragoza, M. (1985). Misleading postevent infor-
mation and memory for events: Arguments and evidence against 
memory impairment hypotheses. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: General, 114, 1–16. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0096-​3445.​
114.1.1
Nadel, L., & Moscovitch, M. (1997). Memory consolidation, retro-
grade amnesia and the hippocampal complex. Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology, 7(2), 217–227. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0959-​
4388(97)​80010-4
O’Donnell, R. & Chan, J.C.K. (2023). Does blatantly contradictory 
information reduce the misinformation effect? A Registered 
Report replication of Loftus (1979).Legal and Criminological 
Psychology. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​lcrp.​12242
Okado, Y., & Stark, C. E. L. (2005). Neural activity during encoding 
predicts false memories created by misinformation. Learning & 
Memory, 12(1), 3–11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​lm.​87605
Paller, K. A., & Wagner, A. D. (2002). Observing the transformation 
of experience into memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(2), 
93–102. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s1364-​6613(00)​01845-3
Putnam, A. L., Sungkhasettee, V. W., & Roediger, H. L. III. (2017). 
When misinformation improves memory: The effects of recollect-
ing change. Psychological Science, 28(1), 36–46. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1177/​09567​97616​672268
Shao, X., Li, A., Chen, C., Loftus, E. F., & Zhu, B. (2023). Cross-
stage neural pattern similarity in the hippocampus predicts 
false memory derived from post-event inaccurate information. 
Nature Communications, 14(1), 2299. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41467-​023-​38046-y
Slotnick, S. D., Moo, L. R., Segal, J. B., & Hart, J. (2003). Distinct 
prefrontal cortex activity associated with item memory and source 
memory for visual shapes. Cognitive Brain Research, 17, 75–82.
Slotnick, S.D. (2023). Cluster_threshold. Retrieved June 12, 2023 from 
Web site: http://​www2.​bc.​edu/​~slotn​ics/​scrip​ts.​htm. Accessed 12 
June 2023.
Thomas, A. K., Bulevich, J. B., & Chan, J. C. K. (2010). Testing 
promotes eyewitness accuracy with a warning: Implications for 
retrieval enhanced suggestibility. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 63(2), 149–157. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jml.​2010.​04.​004
Tousignant, J. P., Hall, D., & Loftus, E. F. (1986). Discrepancy detec-
tion and vulnerability to misleading postevent information. Mem-
ory & Cognition, 14(4), 329–338. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​BF032​
02511
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Landeau, B., Papathanassiou, D., Crivello, F., 
Etard, O., Delcroix, N., Mazoyer, B., & Joliot, M. (2002). Auto-
mated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macro-
scopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject 
brain. NeuroImage, 15(1), 273–289. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1006/​nimg.​
2001.​0978
Wheeler, M. E., Petersen, S. E., & Buckner, R. L. (2000). Memory’s 
echo: vivid remembering reactivates sensory-specific cortex. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America, 97(20), 11125–11129. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1073/​pnas.​
97.​20.​11125
Wilford, M. M., Chan, J. C., & Tuhn, S. J. (2014). Retrieval enhances 
eyewitness suggestibility to misinformation in free and cued 
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 20(1), 
81–93. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​xap00​00001
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Practices Statement Behavioral and imaging data are 
available at OSF [https://​osf.​io/​rdcgk/?​view_​only=​9cdfe​8c24b​5745c​
fb9a6​ef54b​7ae21​ff]. These experiments were not preregistered.