Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-022-01328-9
Memories people no longer believe in can still affect them in helpful 
and harmful ways
Ryan Burnell1 · Robert A. Nash2 · Sharda Umanath3 · Maryanne Garry1 
Accepted: 16 May 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
People can come to “remember” experiences they never had, and these false memories—much like memories for real 
experiences—can serve a variety of helpful and harmful functions. Sometimes, though, people realize one of their memories 
is false, and retract their belief in it. These “retracted memories” continue to have many of the same phenomenological 
characteristics as their believed memories. But can they also continue to serve functions? Across four experiments, we asked 
subjects to rate the extent to which their retracted memories serve helpful and harmful functions and compared these functions 
with those served by “genuine” autobiographical memories. People rated their retracted memories as serving both helpful 
and harmful functions, much like their genuine memories. In addition, we found only weak relationships between people’s 
belief in their memories and the extent to which those memories served perceived functions. These results suggest memories 
can serve functions even in the absence of belief and highlight the potential for false memories to affect people’s thinking and 
behavior even after people have retracted them.
Keywords False memory · Memory functions · Autobiographical memory
A participant in one of our studies recounted a vivid memory 
of a distressing accident. During some home renovations, 
he told us, a piece of metal flew into his eye. The doctors 
explained that his eyesight would be unaffected, but they 
could not remove the metal. But when this man visited a 
doctor a few years later, he learned there was no piece of 
metal in his eye. He realized his memory was completely 
false; there had been no accident, no trip to the doctor. These 
false memories—like real memories—can be compelling 
and affect people’s thinking and behavior in both helpful and 
harmful ways (Bernstein et al., 2005; Laney et al., 2008; Pil-
lemer, 1992). For example, our participant’s memory might 
have led him to be more cautious in his home repairs. But 
even after this man realized the accident never happened, 
he still retained a vivid “memory” of the event. Could this 
memory, once retracted, still affect his behavior?
This question is important to answer because this man’s 
experience is not uncommon. In fact, approximately 20% of 
adults can think of at least one “memory” of an event they 
now realize never happened (Mazzoni et al., 2010). These 
“memories” have been referred to as “nonbelieved memo-
ries,” and are typically defined as vivid memories for events 
people once believed to be true, but which they later stopped 
believing. Crucially, people still retain the “memory” even 
though they no longer believe the events happened (Maz-
zoni et al., 2010; Scoboria et al., 2015). These memories 
comprise a class of memories of interest for a variety of 
theoretical and practical reasons (Otgaar et al., 2015).
But are they best described as “nonbelieved memories?” 
It is true that, as a package, people are no longer willing to 
call the memories real. Yet people often report belief in at 
least some aspects of these memories, which does not square 
with the term “nonbelieved” (Scoboria, Nash, et al., 2017). 
Of course, this continued belief is hardly surprising in light 
of work showing false memories typically feature plausi-
ble arrangements of people, places, and objects (Hyman & 
Kleinkneckt, 1999; Mazzoni et al., 2001). Also, the term 
“nonbelieved memories” does not convey a crucial feature 
 * Maryanne Garry

maryanne.garry@waikato.ac.nz
1 
School of Psychology, University of Waikato, Private Bag 
3105, Hamilton 3240, New Zealand
2 
School of Psychology, Aston University, Birmingham, UK
3 
Department of Psychological Science, Claremont McKenna 
College, Claremont, CA, USA
/ Published online: 14 June 2022

1 3
of these memories—that people once believed in the parts 
of the memory they eventually realized were not real. To 
address these concerns, we turned to the false memory lit-
erature, in which the term “retracted” has long been used to 
describe memories people used to believe, but no longer do 
(Lief & Fetkewicz, 1995; Ost, 2017). “Retracted memories” 
can accommodate memories in which people hold some 
belief, but which do not, ultimately, meet the threshold to 
be endorsed as real. Moreover, the term “retracted” echoes 
usage in legal settings. For all these reasons, we adopt the 
term “retracted memories” and suggest this term better cap-
tures memories people have come to realize are false.
To understand the potential for retracted memories to 
affect people’s thinking and behavior, we first need to con-
sider the effects of “genuine” memories. The literature sug-
gests that autobiographical memories serve at least three 
broad helpful functions (Bluck et al., 2005; Pillemer, 1992). 
First, they direct thinking and behavior—for example, the 
memory of an academic success might lead people to pursue 
further studies (Addis et al., 2007; Pillemer, 2003). Sec-
ond, they help people maintain a coherent sense of self—for 
instance, that same academic success might give people con-
fidence that they are intelligent and capable (Conway, 2005; 
Ross & Wilson, 2003). Third, people share their memories 
with others to help forge and maintain vital social relation-
ships—for example, people might discuss with their family 
the stress of waiting for their exam results to elicit empathy 
(Alea & Bluck, 2003). Recent evidence suggests memories 
can also serve harmful versions of these functions (Burnell 
et al., 2020). For example, the memory of an academic fail-
ure might direct behavior in harmful ways if it leads people 
to give up on their career and might serve a harmful self 
function if it leads people to think they are not intelligent. 
And if people repeatedly complain about this failure to oth-
ers, it could damage their relationships with those others—a 
harmful social function. In fact, there is evidence that memo-
ries can serve a mix of these helpful and harmful functions 
(Burnell et al., 2020). Could retracted memories still serve 
these functions, helpful and harmful, even after people have 
retracted them? That is the question we address here.
On the one hand, there are reasons to think retracted 
memories might not continue to serve functions. From an 
evolutionary perspective, it would not be particularly adap-
tive for people to rely on memories they know are wrong 
(Nairne et al., 2008; Scoboria et al., 2017a). After all, it has 
been suggested that a key evolutionary advantage of memory 
is that it enables organisms to remember past experiences 
and adjust subsequent behavior accordingly (Klein et al., 
2002). For example, humans’ ability to remember where to 
find food and water provides obvious survival advantages 
(Ginsburg & Jablonka, 2010). But if these memories were 
wrong, relying on them might not be adaptive—there would 
be little utility in searching for a water source that never 
existed. In fact, relying on these memories might be mal-
adaptive, leading to unnecessary expenditure of time and 
energy. Therefore, when people realize one of their memo-
ries is false, we might expect them to stop relying on it. 
There is some evidence for this idea: In one study, subjects 
were led to falsely remember reading a “lure” word from a 
Deese–Roediger–McDermott list (Deese, 1959; Wang et al., 
2017; Roediger & McDermott, 1995). Later, when asked 
to solve a problem related to the lure word, subjects who 
believed they saw the lure word tended to be faster at solv-
ing the problems than were subjects who never developed 
this false memory. But more importantly, subjects who ini-
tially believed they saw the lure word, but then learned their 
memory was wrong, did not show this advantage. These 
findings fit with the idea that when people stop believing in 
a memory, that memory is less likely to guide their thinking 
and behavior.
On the other hand, there are reasons to think retracted 
memories might continue to serve functions. For one thing, 
when people imagine events that might happen in the future, 
they clearly do not believe those events have happened. Yet 
future thoughts have profound effects on thinking and behav-
ior (Daniel et al., 2013; Suddendorf & Corballis, 2007; see 
also Sanson et al., 2018). Perhaps, then, the vivid phenome-
nological characteristics of these thoughts help drive them to 
serve functions. Consistent with this idea, vivid phenomeno-
logical characteristics have been linked with the functions of 
memories. Autobiographical memories often contain valu-
able perceptual, spatial, and temporal information people 
can draw on, and which helps cue memories when they are 
needed (Pillemer, 1992; Schacter & Madore, 2016; Tulv-
ing, 1985; Williams, 2007). Therefore, if retracted memories 
retain these episodic characteristics, they might continue to 
serve functions. Indeed, when people retract their belief in 
a memory, many of the characteristics of that “memory”—
including the sense of reliving that accompanies it—remain 
relatively unaffected (Mazzoni et al., 2010; Scoboria et al., 
2014). Why? One explanation is that belief is not an inherent 
or stable property of a memory. Instead, it is an attribution 
people make in the moment, based on factors such as the 
phenomenological characteristics of that memory, whether 
it makes logical sense, and whether it fits with supporting 
memories (Johnson et al., 1988; Johnson et al., 1993; Sanson 
et al., 2020; Taylor et al., 2020). Therefore, if belief is simply 
an attribution, retracting a memory should have minimal 
impact on the characteristics of that memory. And if these 
phenomenological characteristics are what drives memories 
to serve functions, we might expect retracted memories to 
continue serving functions.
To what extent, then, do retracted memories serve func-
tions? If belief in memories is important for those memo-
ries to serve functions, we should expect retracted memo-
ries to serve functions less than “believed” memories. But 
1320

1 3
if functions depend at least in part on phenomenological 
characteristics, retracted memories should continue to 
serve at least some functions. Across four experiments, we 
addressed this question by asking people to report the help-
ful and harmful functions of their retracted memories. We 
then compared these functions to those served by believed 
memories.
Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we measured the self-reported helpful 
and harmful functions of people’s retracted memories and 
compared these functions with those served by memories 
that people still believe. This experiment was preregistered; 
the preregistrations, supplemental materials, and data for 
all experiments reported in this paper are available on the 
Open Science Framework (https://​osf.​io/​q3sjm/). These 
experiments were approved by The University of Waikato’s 
School of Psychology Research Ethics Committee under 
the delegated authority of the University’s Human Research 
Ethics Committee.
Method
Subjects
We recruited workers on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk plat-
form (MTurk; https://​www.​mturk.​com/) through TurkPrime 
(Litman et al., 2017).1 Subjects participated in exchange 
for Amazon credit. To give us at least 80% power to detect 
medium effects (d = 0.4), we sought to collect data from 
100 subjects with retracted memories. Expecting 20%–25% 
of subjects to report having a retracted memory, we aimed 
to collect data until 400 subjects had completed the survey. 
Because of the way MTurk interacts with Qualtrics, 414 sub-
jects completed the survey. According to our preregistered 
criteria, we then excluded 16 subjects who did not provide 
an autobiographical memory—for example, one subject sim-
ply wrote “good.” In addition to these preregistered exclu-
sions, we excluded a further 14 who clearly misunderstood 
the instruction to provide a retracted memory—for example, 
several subjects wrote about negative experiences they wish 
had never happened. Finally, we excluded seven subjects 
who provided a believed memory outside the requested 4–10 
age range,2 leaving us with our final sample of 377 subjects 
(236 women, 138 men, three gender diverse; Mage = 37.10, 
SDage = 12.34; see the Supplemental Materials for informa-
tion about level of education).
Procedure
First, we provided subjects with a description of a retracted 
memory, adapted from the literature (Mazzoni et al., 2010):
“Sometimes, people have a memory for an event, but 
they stop believing the event really happened to them. 
Nevertheless, their ‘memory’ for the event continues 
to feel like a real memory.”
Then, we asked subjects whether they have one of these 
memories. Subjects who said “yes” described that memory. 
Subjects who said “no” served as our comparison group and 
described a “believed” memory that occurred between the 
ages 4 and 10. We used this age range to match the age 
of the believed memories to the retracted memories, which 
mostly fell within this range in a landmark study of retracted 
memories (Mazzoni et al., 2010).
Next, subjects rated their nominated memory on four 
pairs of items measuring the extent to which a memory 
is helpful and harmful, such as “This memory guides my 
thinking and behavior in ways that help me” (Burnell et al., 
2020; Rasmussen & Berntsen, 2009). These items appear in 
Table 1. Then, subjects rated their belief in the memory on a 
single item and reported how old they were when the event 
“occurred” (see Table 1). Finally, subjects who described a 
retracted memory were asked when and why they stopped 
believing in the memory—because these data are not central 
to our research question, they can be found on the Open Sci-
ence Framework.
Results
Descriptives
We first classified subjects according to whether they 
reported having a retracted memory. We found that 106 
people (28%) reported having a retracted memory, and 
271 (72%) reported not having any. Examples of retracted 
memories include “I remember being chased by geese at my 
8th birthday party in a park, but I feel like I may have got-
ten that memory from a television show” and “I remember 
really driving my parent’s car when I was a little kid with 
my younger sister holding the pedals.” In the mean, subjects’ 
descriptions were 36.19 words long (SD = 25.53, Mdn = 
28, range: 4–127). Examples of believed memories include 
“When I was 7, a friend accidentally hit me with a metal 
bat, and I had to go to the hospital to receive stitches” and 
“I remember my 5th birthday party. We had a piñata, and a 
ton of people came. I remember it was probably the biggest 
1 MTurk is an online platform through which people can sign-up 
to complete short tasks or participate in research studies for small 
rewards.
2 The pattern does not change when these subjects are included.
1321

1 3
party I had as a child.” In the mean, subjects’ descriptions 
were 38.22 words long (SD = 24.03, Mdn = 34, range: 
3–147).
As expected, subjects believed their retracted memories 
less than the believed memories (see Table 2). This finding, 
which suggests residual belief in some retracted memories, 
fits with prior work (Scoboria et al., 2014; Scoboria et al., 
2017b). Subjects believed in their retracted memories for 
a mean of 9.09 years (SD = 9.35) before retracting them, 
which in turn occurred 12.38 years (SD = 10.65) prior to 
the study. The retracted memories also “occurred” at a later 
age than subjects’ believed memories (Mretracted = 13.63, SD 
= 10.47, Mdn = 10.50, range: 0–59; Mbelieved = 6.49, SD = 
1.76, Mdn = 6, range: 4–10).
Function ratings
We now turn to our primary question: To what extent do 
people think their retracted memories serve helpful and 
harmful functions? To answer this question, we created a 
measure of helpful function by taking the mean of the items 
measuring the helpful directive, self, and social functions 
for each memory. Likewise, we created a measure of harm-
ful function by taking the mean of the items measuring the 
harmful directive, self, and social functions. Both measures 
had good reliability (αhelpful = 0.85, αharmful = 0.88). We dis-
play the results of these two measures in Fig. 1—the left 
side displays subjects’ ratings of their retracted memories, 
and the right side displays subjects’ ratings of their believed 
memories. As the distribution on the left side of the figure 
shows, many subjects rated their retracted memories as at 
least moderately helpful and harmful. Furthermore, if we 
compare these ratings to subjects’ ratings of their believed 
memories, we see the two types of memories were rated as 
similarly helpful, Mretracted = 3.06; Mbelieved = 3.18; Mdiff = 
0.12, 95% CI [−0.27, 0.51], p = .547, d = 0.07. Likewise, 
subjects’ believed and retracted memories were rated as 
similarly harmful, Mretracted = 2.49; Mbelieved = 2.18; Mdiff = 
0.32, 95% CI [−0.02, 0.66], p = .066, d = 0.22. These results 
suggest many people think their retracted memories continue 
to serve helpful and harmful functions.
One interpretation of these findings is that people do 
not need to believe a memory is “real” for it to serve func-
tions. But there is another explanation. As we noted earlier, 
Table 1 Function, belief, and valence items from Experiments 1, 2, and 3
Helpful functions
 This memory guides my thinking and behavior in ways that help me (1 = Not at all 7 = To a very high degree)
 This memory tells me about my identity in ways that help me (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree)
 I share this memory with other people in ways that help me (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree)
 This memory gives me a sense of belonging with other people (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree; Experiments 1 & 2 only)
Harmful functions
 This memory guides my thinking and behavior in ways that hurt me (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree)
 This memory tells me about my identity in ways that hurt me (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree)
 I share this memory with other people in ways that hurt me (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree)
 This memory gives me a sense of disconnection from other people (1 = Not at all, 7 = To a very high degree; Experiments 1 & 2 only)
Belief
 I believe this event really occurred in the way I remember it, and that I have not imagined or fabricated anything that did not occur (1 = 100% 
imaginary, 7 = 100% real)
Valence (Experiments 2 and 3 only)
 The feelings I experience as I recall the event are positive (1 = Not at all, 7 = Extremely)
 The feelings I experience as I recall the event are negative (1 = Not at all, 7 = Extremely)
Table 2 Subjects’ belief ratings for each experiment
*p < .05
Experiment
Believed
Retracted
M
Mdn
SD
M
Mdn
SD
Mdiff
95% CI
p
Experiment 1
6.24
7.00
1.24
4.51
5.00
1.94
1.73
[1.33, 2.14]
<.001*
Experiment 2
6.41
7.00
1.07
3.81
4.00
2.06
2.60
[2.17, 3.02]
<.001*
Experiment 3
5.96
7.00
1.42
3.67
4.00
1.99
2.29
[2.02, 2.55]
<.001*
Experiment 4
5.84
6.00
1.16
3.98
4.00
1.50
1.86
[1.67, 2.05]
<.001*
1322

1 3
subjects reported some residual belief in their retracted 
memories. Perhaps, then, the retracted memories served 
functions only because subjects still held some belief in 
them. If so, we would expect the memories subjects believed 
most to also be the most helpful or harmful. Exploratory 
analyses provided some evidence for this account. For 
instance, the more people reported believing in a memory, 
the more helpful they rated that memory, r(104) = .34, 
95% CI [0.16, 0.50], p < .001. Likewise, the more people 
reported believing in a memory, the more harmful they rated 
it, although this relationship was plausibly no different from 
zero, r(104) = 0.17, 95% CI [−0.02, 0.35], p = .073. But 
given our relatively small sample of retracted memories and 
the wide confidence intervals around these correlations, it 
is difficult to draw conclusions from them (Schönbrodt & 
Perugini, 2013).
One limitation of these data is that subjects’ retracted 
memories tended to be for events that “occurred” at a later 
age than the believed events. To the extent that recent events 
might be more vivid and more relevant to people’s current 
situation, these differences in how long ago the believed 
and retracted events occurred might be masking differ-
ences between believed and retracted memories that would 
otherwise be apparent. There were two main reasons that 
subjects’ retracted and believed memories were not well-
matched on age. First, subjects tended to provide a believed 
memory from the lower end of the 4–10 age range—perhaps 
because our instructions encouraged a search starting at age 
4. Second, there was a wider spread in the age distribution 
of retracted memories than we anticipated based on prior 
research (Mazzoni et al., 2010; see the Supplemental Mate-
rials for a full breakdown). Therefore, we sought to replicate 
Experiment 1 using believed memories that more closely 
matched the retracted memories. Experiment 2 was not 
preregistered but followed the same analytic approach as 
Experiment 1.
Experiment 2
Method
Subjects
We recruited workers on MTurk through TurkPrime. Sub-
jects participated in exchange for Amazon credit. We again 
aimed to collect data until 400 subjects had completed the 
survey. In total, 414 subjects completed the survey. As in 
Experiment 1, we excluded 17 subjects who did not provide 
an autobiographical memory and a further 14 who misun-
derstood the instruction to provide a retracted memory, leav-
ing us with 383 subjects (235 women, 147 men, one gender 
diverse; Mage = 37.08, SDage = 12.20).
Procedure
The method for Experiment 2 was the same as Experiment 
1, with three exceptions. First, given the wide range of 
Fig. 1 Subjects’ ratings from Experiment 1 of the extent to which their nominated memory serves helpful and harmful functions. Bars represent 
the mean values; dots (jittered for legibility) represent individual data points. Error bars represent the 95% CIs around the cell means
1323

1 3
belief ratings in Experiment 1, we clarified the definition of 
retracted memories we provided to subjects:
Sometimes, people have a memory for an event, but 
they come to realize the event never happened at all—
their “memory” was completely false. Nevertheless, 
their “memory” for the event continues to feel like a 
real memory, even though they know the event didn’t 
really happen.
Second, we sought to elicit an age distribution of believed 
memories that better matched the retracted memories. We 
asked subjects without any retracted memories to describe 
a “believed” memory that occurred before the age of 15. 
Third, recent work suggests negative memories, in particu-
lar, are often harmful (Burnell et al., 2020). Therefore, we 
asked subjects to rate the valence of their memory on two 
items: one measuring the extent to which the memory elicits 
positive feelings, and one measuring the extent to which the 
memory elicits negative feelings (see Table 1).
Results
Descriptives
As in Experiment 1, we classified subjects according to 
whether they have a retracted memory. In this experiment, 
101 people (26%) reported having one, and 282 people 
(74%) reported not having any. An example of a retracted 
memory was: “I remember going to a theme park with my 
family when I was younger and I remember stuff we did 
but they tell me that we never went anywhere.” Subjects’ 
descriptions of their retracted memories were 39.55 words 
long in the mean (SD = 22.12, Mdn = 34, range: 5–109). An 
example of a believed memory was: “I remember seeing my 
grandma the last time before she died hoping it would not be 
the last.” Subjects’ descriptions of their believed memories 
were 41.27 words long in the mean (SD = 24.73, Mdn = 
36.50, range: 4–174).
Once again, subjects’ retracted memories were believed 
less than subjects’ believed memories (see Table 2). Our 
revised instructions elicited memories that were believed 
less than in Experiment 1. In the mean, the retracted mem-
ories were believed for 7.04 years (SD = 7.72) and were 
retracted 12.67 years ago (SD = 11.80). The age distribu-
tions were better matched than in Experiment 1, but the 
retracted memories still occurred later, Mretracted = 14.99, 
SD = 12.60, Mdn = 8, range: 1–55; Mbelieved = 10.08, SD = 
3.36, Mdn = 11, range: 1–15.
Function ratings
Next, we returned to our primary research question: to what 
extent do people think their retracted memories serve func-
tions in helpful and harmful ways? As Fig. 2 shows, we 
replicated the findings of Experiment 1—many subjects 
reported their retracted memories serve helpful and harmful 
functions to at least a moderate degree. We again found no 
evidence that people think their retracted memories are less 
Fig. 2 Subjects’ ratings from Experiment 2 of the extent to which their nominated memory serves helpful and harmful functions. Bars represent 
the mean values; dots (jittered for legibility) represent individual data points, and error bars represent the 95% CIs around the cell means
1324

1 3
harmful than believed memories, Mretracted = 2.32; Mbelieved = 
2.23 Mdiff = 0.09, 95% CI [−0.22, 0.40], p = .564, d = 0.06. 
We did, however, find that retracted memories were rated 
as slightly less helpful than believed memories, Mretracted = 
2.97; Mbelieved = 3.35; Mdiff = 0.38, 95% CI [0.06, 0.71], p 
= .021, d = 0.26. Together, these results provide further 
evidence that people think their retracted memories continue 
to serve helpful and harmful functions.
As in Experiment 1, we next examined the relationship 
between subjects’ belief in their retracted memories and the 
degree to which those memories serve functions. In this 
experiment, we found that the relationship between belief 
and helpful functions was plausibly no different from zero, 
r(99) = 0.16, 95% CI [−0.03, 0.35], p = .102. Likewise, 
the relationship between belief and harmful function was 
plausibly zero, r(99) = 0.07, 95% CI [−0.13, 0.26], p = .491. 
Taken together, we found no compelling evidence to suggest 
that belief is important for memories to serve functions.
However, subjects’ retracted and believed memories 
were still not well matched for how long ago the events 
“occurred.” Therefore, in Experiment 3, we yoked subjects’ 
believed memories to their retracted memories to ensure the 
two types of memories were matched on age.
Experiment 3
So that we could easily yoke subjects’ believed memories to 
their retracted memories, we switched to a within-subjects 
design—when subjects reported having a retracted memory, 
we asked them to describe both that memory and a believed 
memory that occurred around the same time. In addition, 
to examine the relationships between the phenomenologi-
cal characteristics of people’s retracted memories and the 
functions those memories serve, we added a series of items 
measuring phenomenological characteristics from the Auto-
biographical Memory Questionnaire (Rubin et al., 2003, 
2004). Finally, we markedly increased our sample size so 
we could draw stronger conclusions from the correlations 
between belief and perceived functions. This experiment was 
preregistered.
Method
Subjects
We recruited workers on MTurk through TurkPrime. Sub-
jects participated in exchange for Amazon credit. We aimed 
to collect data until 800 subjects had completed the survey 
to ensure we had a big enough sample of retracted memories 
to establish stable correlations between belief and functions 
(Schönbrodt & Perugini, 2013). In total, 827 subjects com-
pleted the survey. According to our preregistered criteria, we 
excluded 40 subjects who failed attention checks, 13 who did 
not provide an autobiographical memory, and 67 who mis-
understood the instruction to provide a retracted memory, 
leaving us with our final sample of 707 subjects.
Procedure
First, we asked subjects if they have any retracted memories, 
using the same instructions as in Experiment 2. Subjects 
who said “yes” described that memory and reported how 
old they were at the time the “event” happened. Those same 
subjects then described a memory they still believe that hap-
pened at the same age. If they could not think of one, we 
asked them to choose an event that occurred as close to that 
age as possible. Subjects who did not have any retracted 
memories rated two believed memories, but because the data 
from these subjects is not central to our research question, 
those data can be found on the Open Science Framework.
Next, subjects rated each memory, in counterbalanced 
order, on a series of scales—completing the full set of scales 
for one memory before rating the other. First, subjects rated 
the functions of the memory and their belief in it using the 
items from Experiments 1 and 2. We removed the function 
items asking about belonging/disconnection from others 
because the social belonging function is less agreed upon in 
the literature (Rasmussen & Berntsen, 2009). Then, subjects 
completed 17 items measuring the phenomenological char-
acteristics of the memory, such how vivid the memory is, 
and the extent to which it is accompanied by a sense of reliv-
ing (see the Supplemental Materials for the full list of items 
and the results for each item; Rubin et al. 2003). Finally, 
subjects reported when and why they retracted the memory.
Results
Descriptives
Once again, we classified subjects according to whether they 
reported having a retracted memory. A larger percentage 
of subjects reported having a retracted memory than in the 
first two experiments: 321 people (45%) reported they have 
one, and 386 people (55%) reported they do not have any. 
Because our key comparison was within subjects, we report 
here only the data from the 321 subjects who reported hav-
ing a retracted memory (201 women, 115 men, five gender 
diverse; Mage = 36.49, SDage = 11.40).
In the mean, subjects’ descriptions of their retracted 
memories were 33.30 words long (SD = 21.51, Mdn = 29, 
range: 4–130). Subjects’ descriptions of these believed 
memories were 25.18 words long in the mean (SD = 17.54, 
Mdn = 21, range: 2–109).
As in Experiments 1 and 2, subjects believed their 
retracted memories less than their believed memories (see 
1325

1 3
Table 2). In the mean, the retracted memories were believed 
for 5.94 years (SD = 7.31) and were retracted 15.88 years 
ago (SD = 12.27). Unlike Experiments 1 and 2, subjects’ 
believed memories and retracted memories “occurred” at 
a similar age (Mretracted = 14.67, SD = 12.75, Mdn = 10, 
range: 0–68; Mbelieved = 14.61, SD = 12.32, Mdn = 10, range: 
1–68).
Function ratings
Now, we return to our primary question. As Fig. 3 shows, we 
found converging evidence for the idea that many retracted 
memories serve helpful and harmful functions. In contrast 
to Experiment 1, but consistent with Experiment 2, sub-
jects rated their retracted memories as less helpful than their 
believed memories, Mretracted = 3.00; Mbelieved = 3.74; Mdiff 
= 0.74, 95% CI [0.55, 0.93], p < .001, d = 0.44. Subjects’ 
believed and retracted memories were rated as similarly 
harmful, Mretracted = 2.27; Mbelieved = 2.26; Mdiff = 0.01, 95% 
CI [−0.13, 0.16], p = .848, d = 0.01.
These differences in helpful functions once again raise 
the possibility that belief in a memory is important for that 
memory to serve helpful functions. Consistent with this idea, 
we found that the more people believed in a retracted mem-
ory, the more helpful it tended to be, r(319) = 0.37, 95% 
CI [0.27, 0.46], p < .001. We also found that that the more 
people believed in a retracted memory, the more harmful it 
tended to be, although this relationship was weaker, r(319) 
= 0.14, 95% CI [0.03, 0.25], p = .011. These results suggest 
belief might be related to the functions memories serve.
The contribution of phenomenology
There is an important counter-explanation, though. Because 
of our design, we could not manipulate belief independently 
of other characteristics. We found that subjects’ retracted 
memories were also different from believed memories in 
phenomenology—consistent with previous work (Mazzoni 
et al., 2010). For example, retracted memories were less 
vivid than believed memories, Mretracted = 4.92; Mbelieved = 
5.46; Mdiff = 0.54, 95% CI [0.36, 0.72], p < .001, d = 0.36, 
and were accompanied by a less intense sense of reliving, 
Mretracted = 4.47; Mbelieved = 5.04; Mdiff = 0.56, 95% CI [0.38, 
0.75], p < .001, d = 0.35. To fully understand the relation-
ship between belief and functions, it is important to also 
consider the contribution of phenomenology.
Therefore, we conducted exploratory regressions to inves-
tigate how the functions of retracted memories are related 
to belief and two key components of phenomenology: reliv-
ing and vividness (Rubin et al., 2019). We conducted two 
linear regressions using the data from subjects’ retracted 
memories: one with belief, vividness, and reliving predicting 
helpful function, and one with belief, vividness, and reliving 
predicting harmful function. As Table 3 shows, belief and 
reliving were independently related to the helpful functions 
served by subjects’ retracted memories, such that the more 
Fig. 3 Subjects’ ratings from Experiment 3 of the extent to which 
their believed and retracted memories serve helpful and harmful func-
tions. Bars represent the mean values; dots (jittered for legibility) rep-
resent individual data points, and error bars represent the 95% CIs 
around the cell means
1326

1 3
people believed in a memory, and the more it was accom-
panied by a sense of reliving, the more helpful people rated 
it. In addition, belief was related to harmful functions such 
that the more people believed in a memory, the more harm-
ful they rated it—although the size of this effect is plausibly 
very small. These results are consistent with the hypothesis 
that belief is important for memories to serve functions and 
suggest that a sense of reliving might also be important—at 
least for helpful functions.
Given we found no evidence that phenomenology is 
related to harmful functions, what other factors might drive 
these functions? One recent study found evidence of harmful 
functions only in negative memories, a finding that might 
suggest the valence of a memory is important (Burnell et al., 
2020). Because a fair number of the retracted memories in 
this study were negative—30.53% were rated above the 
midpoint on the item assessing negative feelings—we con-
ducted exploratory correlations between negative feelings 
and harmful functions. We found that the more a memory 
elicited negative feelings, the more harmful it was rated, 
r(319) = 0.42, 95% CI [0.33, 0.51], p < .001. Furthermore, 
adding negative feelings to the regression model predicting 
harmful functions showed that this relationship held even 
after accounting for belief, reliving, and vividness (p < .001; 
see the Supplemental Materials for the regression table). 
By contrast, the relationship between negative feelings and 
helpful functions was trivial, r(319) = 0.04, 95% CI [−0.07, 
0.15], p = .448. These findings suggest that characteristics 
specific to negative memories, such as the emotions those 
memories elicit or the kinds of events that these memories 
depict might be important for memories to serve harmful 
functions.
Taken together, these three experiments provide some 
evidence that belief is related to the helpful functions a 
memory serves—or, at least, to the functions people think 
the memory serves. But this possibility merits further inves-
tigation, for several reasons. First, the regression analyses we 
conducted in this experiment were exploratory. Second, we 
have so far used only single-item measures of belief, reliv-
ing, and vividness that might not capture all aspects of those 
constructs. Third, we have so far treated helpful functions 
as one unitary construct. But it is possible the relationships 
between belief and functions might be different for different 
functions. For example, people might not draw on retracted 
memories when making decisions but might still talk about 
those memories with others to forge relationships—after all, 
people often embellish or lie about their experiences when 
talking to others (Marsh & Tversky, 2004).
Therefore, in Experiment 4, we conducted a more robust, 
preregistered investigation of the relationships between 
belief, reliving, and helpful functions. To ensure we gath-
ered memories with a wide enough range of belief to see 
meaningful relationships, we broadened our memory prompt 
instructions—rather than asking people for a memory they 
have completely retracted, we asked them for the memory 
about which they have the most doubts.3
Experiment 4
Experiment 4 departed from the previous experiments in 
several ways. First, rather than asking for retracted memo-
ries, we asked people for memories they doubt. Second, we 
employed multi-item measures of belief, reliving, and vivid-
ness adapted from the Autobiographical Memory Question-
naire (see Rubin et al., 2019). Third, to better enable us to 
separately examine directive, self, and social functions, we 
used a different measure of functions: the Thinking About 
Life Events (TALE) questionnaire, which includes five items 
measuring each of the directive, self, and social functions 
(Bluck & Alea, 2011). This experiment was preregistered.
Method
Subjects
We recruited workers on MTurk through TurkPrime. 
Because precision around the effect sizes from Experiment 
3 was good (see Cumming, 2014), we aimed for a similar 
sample size in this Experiment. We anticipated most subjects 
to be able to think of a memory they doubt, so we aimed to 
collect data until 400 subjects had completed the survey. In 
total, 413 subjects completed the survey. According to our 
Table 3 Standardized Beta estimates from the regressions from Experiment 3 predicting helpful and harmful functions among subjects’ retracted 
memories
*p < .05
Reliving
Vividness
Belief
Dependent Measure
β [95% CI]
p
β [95% CI]
p
β [95% CI]
p
Helpful Function
0.21 [0.09, 0.32]
.001*
0.09 [−0.04, 0.21]
.162
0.27 [0.19, 0.36]
<.001*
Harmful Function
0.03 [−0.08, 0.15]
.635
0.04 [−0.09, 0.16]
.589
0.12 [0.03, 0.20]
.045
3 A pilot study established this prompt elicits a wide belief distribu-
tion; see the Supplemental Materials.
1327

1 3
preregistered criteria, we excluded 13 subjects who failed 
both attention checks, 90 subjects who failed to provide two 
autobiographical memories, and 14 subjects who reported 
they could not think of a memory they doubt, leaving us with 
our final sample of 298 subjects.
Procedure
First, we provided subjects with a description of a doubted 
memory: “Sometimes people have doubts about particular 
memories of their past experiences—that is, they doubt 
whether the events they remember really happened at all.”
Then, we asked subjects to describe the memory they 
have the most doubts about. As a comparison, we asked 
subjects to describe a believed memory that happened to 
them during their early childhood.4
Next, subjects rated the functions, belief, and phenom-
enology of each memory. Subjects made these three sets of 
ratings in counterbalanced order and completed all ratings 
for one memory before rating the other.
Functions Subjects rated the functions of their memory on 
the TALE (Bluck & Alea, 2011). We adapted this question-
naire to ask about a specific memory (see the Supplemental 
Materials). In this scale, subjects complete 15 items that 
ask about how often they think or talk about the memory 
for a series of reasons, on a scale from 1 (almost never) 
to 5 (very frequently). Five of the items ask about reasons 
that map on to the directive function, five about reasons that 
map onto the self function, and five about reasons that map 
onto the social function. Note that this scale measures only 
helpful functions—we did not include a measure of harmful 
functions because in Experiment 3 belief was only a weak 
predictor of harmful functions and we found no evidence 
that vividness or reliving predicts harmful functions.
Belief
Subjects rated their belief in the memory on the three items 
from Rubin et al. (2019). The first of these items was the 
belief item from Experiments 1–3. The second was “My 
memory of the event is an accurate reflection of the event as 
a neutral observer would report it and is not distorted by my 
beliefs, motives, and expectations” (1 = 100% distorted, 7 
= 100% accurate). The third was “Would you be confident 
enough in your memory of the event to testify in a court of 
law?” (1 = Not at all, 7 = As much as any memory).
Phenomenology
Subjects rated the sense of reliving produced by the memory 
using three items from Rubin et al. (2019), all rated from 
1 (not at all) to 7 (as if it were happening now): “While 
remembering, it is as if I am living the occurrence again.”; 
“While remembering, it is as if I am mentally traveling back 
to the time and place of the occurrence”; and “While remem-
bering, it is as if I am experiencing the same feelings, emo-
tions, and/or atmosphere again.” Subjects rated the vividness 
of the memory using two items, also from Rubin et al., on a 
scale from 1 (not at all) to 7 (as vivid as if it were happen-
ing now): “While remembering, I can see everything in my 
mind.” and “While remembering, the actions, objects, and/
or people that are involved in the memory are as clear now 
as they were when the event occurred.”
Results
Descriptives
We first checked that subjects’ doubted memories were 
rated lower on belief than their “believed” memories from 
a similar time. They were (see Table 2). Examples of sub-
jects’ doubted memories include “I have a memory about 
my learning to ride a bike. I remember my dad teaching me 
to ride the bike when I was 5 years old, but my aunt said 
that my dad was out of town and she taught me. My aunt 
has been known to stir up trouble so I am not really sure if I 
can believe her. My dad said that he taught me” and “I have 
doubts about my memory of my grandmother’s death.”
Function ratings
Before we addressed our primary aim, we next examined 
subjects’ ratings of the functions served by their doubted 
memories. Recall that in this experiment, we used a func-
tion scale that measures only the degree to which a memory 
is helpful. We created a sum variable for each of the direc-
tive, self, and social functions by taking the mean of the five 
items from the TALE measuring that function. We display 
these function sum variables for the doubted and believed 
memories in Fig. 4. As the figure shows, subjects rated the 
functions of the two types of memory as remarkably simi-
lar—we found no difference between doubted and believed 
memories in terms of directive functions, Mdoubted = 1.93, 
Mbelieved = 1.86, Mdiff = 0.07, 95% CI [−0.03, 0.17], p = 
.156, d = 0.08; self functions, Mdoubted = 1.88, Mbelieved = 
1.84, Mdiff = 0.04, 95% CI [−0.07, 0.14], p = .478, d = 0.04; 
or social functions, Mdoubted = 1.83, Mbelieved = 1.90, Mdiff = 
0.07, 95% CI [−0.03, 0.17], p = .169, d = 0.08. These results 
replicate the previous experiments, and further support the 
4 We used this prompt, rather than yoking the believed memories 
to the retracted memories as we did in Experiment 3, so we could 
counterbalance the order in which people provided and rated the two 
memories.
1328

1 3
idea that memories can serve functions even when people 
doubt their veracity.
Predicting functions from belief, reliving, and vividness
Next, we addressed our primary aim: to investigate the 
relationships among belief, recollection, and self-reported 
helpful functions. To do so, we created a sum variable for 
belief by calculating the mean of the three items measuring 
belief, a sum variable for reliving by calculating the mean of 
the three items measuring reliving, and a sum variable for 
vividness by calculating the mean of the two items measur-
ing vividness. Then, for each type of memory (doubted and 
believed), we conducted three preregistered linear regres-
sions—one for each function—with belief, vividness, and 
reliving as predictors.
We first consider the results from the regressions con-
ducted on subjects’ ratings of their doubted memories, 
displayed in the top half of Table 4. As the table shows, 
reliving predicted the directive and self functions of sub-
jects’ doubted memories, such that the more a memory was 
accompanied by a sense of reliving, the more it tended to 
serve those two functions. There was again no evidence 
that vividness was related to the functions of these doubted 
memories. These findings are consistent with the pattern 
we found in Experiment 3. But in contrast to Experiment 3, 
Fig. 4 Subjects’ ratings from Experiment 4 of the extent to which their believed and doubted memories serve helpful and harmful functions. 
Bars represent the mean values; dots represent individual data points, and error bars represent the 95% CIs around the cell means
Table 4 Standardized Beta estimates for the regressions from Experiment 4
*p < .05
Dependent Measure
Reliving
Vividness
Belief
β [95% CI]
p
β [95% CI]
p
β [95% CI]
p
Doubted Memories
Directive function
0.14 [0.02, 0.25]
.018*
−0.03 [−0.14, 0.07]
.550
0.09 [−0.03, 0.20]
.138
Self function
0.13 [0.02, 0.25]
.026*
−0.02 [−0.13, 0.08]
.650
0.05 [−0.07, 0.16]
.441
Social function
0.02 [−0.08, 0.12]
.669
0.05 [−0.04, 0.14]
.284
−0.01 [−0.11, 0.10]
.910
Believed Memories
Directive function
0.14 [0.04, 0.25]
.007*
0.07 [−0.04, 0.17]
.231
−0.18 [−0.31, −0.05]
.007*
Self function
0.21 [0.11, 0.31]
<.001*
0.02 [−0.08, 0.13]
.665
−0.11 [−0.24, 0.02]
.084
Social function
0.05 [−0.06, 0.15]
.372
0.09 [−0.02, 0.20]
.120
−0.14 [−0.27, −0.01]
.041*
1329

1 3
we found no evidence that belief predicted the functions of 
doubted memories.
We next consider the regressions conducted on subjects’ 
ratings of their believed memories, displayed in the bottom 
half of Table 4. Here, too, we found that reliving predicted 
the directive and self functions, such that the more a believed 
memory was accompanied by a sense of reliving, the more it 
tended to serve those functions. We also found that belief pre-
dicted the directive and social functions of subjects’ believed 
memories, such that the more subjects believed in a memory, 
the less it tended to serve these functions. This pattern of 
results is the opposite of what we would expect if belief in a 
memory is important for that memory to serve functions—
and provides some evidence against this hypothesis.
Taken together, we did not find evidence to suggest 
that belief is important for memories to serve functions. 
Instead, the most consistent finding from these regression 
analyses was that the more a memory was accompanied 
by a sense of reliving, the more people rated it as serving 
directive and self functions.
Meta analyses
Across the four experiments, our findings about the rela-
tionships between belief and functions were inconsistent. 
For example, in Experiment 1 we found a moderate posi-
tive correlation between belief and helpful function, but in 
Experiment 2 that relationship was smaller and plausibly 
zero. Therefore, to obtain more precise estimates of the 
strength of these relationships, we followed recommenda-
tions from Cumming (2014) and conducted two explora-
tory (not preregistered) mini meta-analyses (see also Goh 
et al., 2016).
First, we conducted a meta-analysis of the relationships 
between belief and perceived helpful functions across the 
four experiments. As the top panel of Fig. 5 shows, this 
analysis suggested there was a small, positive correlation 
between belief and helpful functions. Next, we conducted 
a meta-analysis of the relationships between belief and 
harmful functions across the first three experiments (we 
did not measure harmful functions in Experiment 4). As 
Fig. 5 Forest plots of the relationships between belief and functions. 
The top panel displays the forest plot of the correlations between 
belief and helpful functions. The bottom panel displays the forest plot 
of the correlations between belief and harmful functions. Squares rep-
resent the correlations for each experiment, diamonds represent the 
overall effect size estimate from the meta-analyses
1330

1 3
the bottom panel of Fig. 5 shows, we also found a small 
positive relationship between belief and harmful functions. 
Given that the four experiments differed in some aspects 
of their design and there was some heterogeneity in the 
results, the overall effect size estimates should be consid-
ered with some caution. But across the board, the results 
suggest belief is, at best, weakly related to the functions 
people think their memories serve.
General discussion
Across four experiments, we investigated the extent to which 
retracted memories serve functions. We consistently found 
that people think their retracted memories serve helpful 
and harmful functions and found only weak relationships 
between people’s belief in a memory and the reported func-
tions of the memory. We also found in both Experiments 3 
and 4 that the more a memory was accompanied by a sense 
of reliving, the more helpful it tended to be.
Taken together, our findings do not support the hypothesis 
that belief is important for memories to serve functions. If 
belief were important, the memories people have retracted 
should serve functions less than the memories they still 
believe. But we instead found that people think their retracted 
memories continue to serve functions to a similar degree as 
believed memories. In addition, mini meta-analyses showed 
that belief was, at best, only weakly related to helpful and 
harmful functions. Moreover, in Experiment 4, these relation-
ships did not hold after controlling for vividness and sense of 
reliving. It seems likely that a range of factors are important 
for memories to serve functions (see, e.g., Lind et al., 2019). 
But considered together, our data fit with the idea that believ-
ing a memory is “real” is not a prerequisite for that memory 
to affect people’s thinking and behaviour.
Our findings do, however, support the hypothesis that 
the phenomenology of memory plays a role in at least 
some memory functions—we consistently found relation-
ships between a sense of reliving and ratings of helpful self 
and directive functions, even after controlling for subjects’ 
belief in the memory. These findings are consistent with 
other literatures showing that both thoughts about the future 
and counterfactuals about the past can evoke emotions and 
influence behavior, even though people do not believe those 
events have happened (Daniel et al., 2013; Rasmussen & 
Berntsen, 2013; Roese, 1994). Given that autobiographi-
cal memories tend to be accompanied by a greater sense of 
reliving than other kinds of memories (e.g., vicarious memo-
ries), this finding could partly explain why people place high 
importance on their own experiences (Pillemer et al., 2015). 
These findings also extend work investigating the relation-
ships between memory characteristics (Rubin et al., 2019). 
But it remains unclear why reliving was not related to the 
helpful social function given that emotions and perceptual 
details play an important role in communication (Pillemer, 
1992; Rimé et al., 1992). Moreover, we found no evidence 
that memory phenomenology plays a role in harmful func-
tions—neither reliving nor vividness predicted ratings of 
harmful functions in Experiment 3. Yet in more extreme 
negative memories, we might see a different pattern—after 
all, reliving traumatic memories in vivid detail is a hallmark 
symptom of maladaptive responses such as posttraumatic 
stress disorder (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 
Regardless, our results raise the possibility that helpful 
and harmful functions are driven by different factors. If so, 
one interpretation of this pattern is that helpful and harm-
ful functions are not entirely parallel and might be better 
thought of as distinct consequences of memory—albeit with 
conceptual similarities.
It is reasonable to wonder, though, how well self-reported 
functions correspond to the “true” functions served by peo-
ple’s memories. For example, did subjects understand the 
broad function items from the first three experiments, such 
as the one measuring the extent to which a memory “guides 
my thinking and behavior in ways that help me”? The data 
suggest they did—the findings from the experiments using 
these broad items are consistent with those of fourth experi-
ment, which measured functions using more concrete, gran-
ular items (e.g., “I think or talk about this memory when 
I want to try to learn from my past mistakes”). A related 
issue is that rating the functions of a memory is a complex 
metacognitive task. Although this approach is commonly 
used in the literature, it requires subjects to bring to mind 
occasions during which they had previously thought about 
the memory and then to evaluate how the memory affected 
their thinking and behavior on those occasions (Bluck & 
Alea, 2011). Because of the complexity and retrospective 
nature of this task, a better approach might be to experimen-
tally implant false memories and then measure the effects of 
those memories on specific behaviors after the participants 
learn the memories are false. For instance, in one study, 
subjects were led to believe they loved asparagus the first 
time they tried it (Laney et al., 2008). This false memory 
influenced subjects’ behavior, leading them to rate asparagus 
as more appealing than subjects without the false memory. 
Researchers could use this paradigm to measure the extent to 
which these effects continue after subjects learn their aspara-
gus memory is false. Such an experiment would provide a 
stronger test of how important it is for people to believe a 
memory for that memory to serve functions.
These experiments investigated how the characteristics 
of a memory are related to the functions served by that 
memory. But it is also important to investigate how func-
tions are related to the characteristics of the person recalling 
the memory. For example, some people place more impor-
tance on their memories than others, and people’s emotion 
1331

1 3
regulation strategies during recall vary markedly (see Rubin 
et al., 2011). More importantly, these tendencies are related 
to how people respond following traumatic events. There-
fore, we might expect to see individual differences in the 
extent to which memories are helpful or harmful—that is, 
two people with similar memories might be affected by those 
memories in different ways (Bonanno, 2004).
Of course, these experiments have limitations. First, 
people’s retracted and believed memories differed not only 
in belief, but in phenomenology—for example, believed 
memories were accompanied by a stronger sense of reliv-
ing. We attempted to address this limitation by controlling 
for reliving and vividness in our regression models, but 
the differences in phenomenology between retracted and 
believed memories made it difficult to isolate the effects of 
belief. Second, we asked people only about the functions 
their memories currently serve. It is therefore impossible to 
know with any degree of precision how, if at all, people’s 
memories changed when they were retracted. These memo-
ries might continue to serve the same functions as they did 
before the retraction. But it is also possible that some func-
tions have reduced, while new functions arose—for exam-
ple, people might have stopped relying on the memory itself 
when making decisions but might now be less trusting of 
their memories in general.
Our findings also resonate with the idea that memories 
do not need to be faithful representations of personal expe-
riences in order be useful (Johnson & Sherman, 1990). 
Indeed, people sometimes draw on both memories of fic-
tional stories and “vicarious memories” of other people’s 
experiences when making decisions (Bandura, 2006; Pil-
lemer et al., 2015; Yang, 2018). And even among people’s 
own autobiographical memories, the objective truth of what 
happened is not always important. When people share their 
memories with others, they often tweak, embellish, or lie 
about their experiences to engage or impress those listen-
ing (Marsh & Tversky, 2004; McCann & Higgins, 1992). 
Furthermore, the way people remember and interpret past 
events changes over time depending on their circumstances 
and goals (Conway, 2005; Johnson & Sherman, 1990). Some 
memory distortions might even be adaptive. For example, 
when considering memories of successes and failures from 
a similar time, people tend to judge the failures as further 
in the past—a tendency that might help people maintain a 
positive view of their current self (Wilson & Ross, 2003). 
The data reported here bolster these ideas by providing evi-
dence that memories might serve functions even after being 
retracted.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to 
investigate the effects of real-world retracted memories on 
people’s thinking and behavior. We have long known that 
false memories can have a range of helpful and harmful 
effects, but our findings suggest these effects might continue 
even after the memories are identified as false (Bernstein 
et al., 2005; Laney et al., 2008). In doing so, our results 
highlight the potential for false memories to do both last-
ing good and lasting harm. For this reason, one could inter-
pret our findings as evidence that studies that implant false 
memories have the potential to produce memories that are 
harmful to subjects even after debriefing. But there are a 
number of reasons to think such a scenario is unlikely. First, 
false memory studies do not implant the extremely negative 
memories that our data suggest are most likely to be harmful 
(Clark et al., 2012). Second, subjects in false memory stud-
ies typically learn their memory is false only days or weeks 
after coming to believe in it. By contrast, most subjects in 
these experiments believed in their retracted memories for 
many years before retracting them. Finally, research shows 
that people tend to find participating in false memory studies 
both enjoyable and valuable (Murphy et al., 2020).
Our findings also have implications for our understand-
ing of how common false memories are. The data we report 
here are at odds with recent claims that false memories are 
rare and occur only as a consequence of highly suggestive 
procedures (Brewin et al., 2020). Across four experiments, 
we found that some 26% to 45% of people have at least one 
memory they now believe to be false. These proportions 
are consistent with other studies of retracted memories and 
provide further support for the idea that misinformation can 
be readily incorporated into people’s memories (Johnson 
et al., 1988; Mazzoni et al., 2010). It is possible that some 
subjects had incorrectly retracted memories of events that 
really did happen (Scoboria et al., 2014). But people are gen-
erally unwilling to invest effort in questioning the accuracy 
of their memories, so it is unlikely they would have done so 
without compelling reasons (Nash et al., 2017; Wade et al., 
2014). Moreover, because it is often difficult to distinguish 
real from false memories, it is likely that some people have 
yet to realize, or may never realize, that they harbor false 
memories that should be retracted (Johnson et al., 1993). 
Therefore, our data might actually underestimate the fre-
quency of false memories in the general population.
Taken together, our data show that people think their 
retracted memories serve both helpful and harmful func-
tions. These results highlight the potential for false memo-
ries to have lasting effects on thinking and behavior, even 
after they have been retracted.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13421-​022-​01328-9.
Acknowledgments We thank the members of the Garry lab for their 
feedback on the manuscript, and gratefully acknowledge the support of 
the New Zealand Government through the Marsden Fund, administered 
by the Royal Society of New Zealand on behalf of the Marsden Fund 
Council (Grant No. 17-UOO-173). R. Burnell gratefully acknowledges 
support from the University of Waikato.
1332

1 3
Author contributions All authors developed the study concepts and 
contributed to study design. R. Burnell, R. A. Nash, and M. Garry cre-
ated the experimental materials. R. Burnell organized data collection 
and performed all data analyses. R. Burnell drafted the manuscript 
with R. A. Nash. S. Umanath and M. Garry provided critical revisions.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its 
Member Institutions This research was supported by the New Zealand 
Government through the Marsden Fund, administered by the Royal 
Society of New Zealand on behalf of the Marsden Fund Council (Grant 
No. 17-UOO-173).
Data availability The preregistrations, materials, and data for all four 
experiments are available on the Open Science Framework (https://​osf.​
io/​q3sjm/). Our ethical approval precludes us from making subjects’ 
written responses publicly available, but these responses are available 
on request.
Code availability The analysis script for the four experiments (writ-
ten in R) is available on the Open Science Framework (https://​osf.​io/​
q3sjm/).
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Ethics approval These experiments were approved by the University 
of Waikato’s School of Psychology Research Ethics Committee under 
the delegated authority of the University’s Human Research Ethics 
Committee.
Consent to participate Informed consent was obtained from all indi-
vidual participants included in the study.
Consent for publication Patients signed informed consent regarding 
publishing their data.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Addis, D. R., Wong, A. T., & Schacter, D. L. (2007). Remembering 
the past and imagining the future: Common and distinct neural 
substrates during event construction and elaboration. Neuropsy-
chologia, 45(7), 1363–1377. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neuro​psych​
ologia.​2006.​10.​016
Alea, N., & Bluck, S. (2003). Why are you telling me that? A concep-
tual model of the social function of autobiographical memory. 
Memory, 11(2), 165–178. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​74193​8207
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders (5th ed., DSM5). Author. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1176/​appi.​books.​97808​90425​596
Bandura, A. (2006). Going global with social cognitive theory: From 
prospect to paydirt. In S. I. Donaldson, D. E. Berger, & K. Pezdek 
(Eds.), The rise of applied psychology: New frontiers and reward-
ing careers (pp. 53–79). Erlbaum.
Bernstein, D. M., Laney, C., Morris, E. K., & Loftus, E. F. (2005). 
False memories about food can lead to food avoidance. Social 
Cognition, 23(1), 11–34. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1521/​soco.​23.1.​11.​
59195
Bluck, S., & Alea, N. (2011). Crafting the tale: Construction of a 
measure to assess the functions of autobiographical remember-
ing. Memory, 19(5), 470–486. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​211.​
2011.​590500
Bluck, S., Alea, N., Habermas, T., & Rubin, D. C. (2005). A tale of 
three functions: The self reported uses of autobiographical mem-
ory. Social Cognition, 23(1), 91–117. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1521/​
soco.​23.1.​91.​59198
Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have 
we underestimated the human capacity to thrive after extremely 
aversive events? American Psychologist, 59(1), 20–28. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1037/​0003-​066X.​59.1.​20
Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., & Mickes, L. (2020). Regaining consensus 
on the reliability of memory. Current Directions in Psychologi-
cal Science, 29(2), 121–125. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​09637​21419​
898122
Burnell, R., Rasmussen, A. S., & Garry, M. (2020). Negative memories 
serve functions in both adaptive and maladaptive ways. Memory, 
28(4), 494–505. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​211.​2020.​17371​33
Clark, A., Nash, R. A., Fincham, G., & Mazzoni, G. (2012). Creating 
non-believed memories for recent autobiographical events. PLoS 
One, 7(3), 1–7. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​00329​98
Conway, M. A. (2005). Memory and the self. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 53(4), 594–628. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jml.​2005.​
08.​005
Cumming, G. (2014). The new statistics: Why and how. Psychological 
Science, 25(1), 7–29. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​09567​97613​504966
Daniel, T. O., Stanton, C. M., & Epstein, L. H. (2013). The future 
is now: Reducing impulsivity and energy intake using episodic 
future thinking. Psychological Science, 24(11), 2339–2342. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​09567​97613​488780
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal 
intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy, 58(1), 17–22. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​h0046​671
Ginsburg, S., & Jablonka, E. (2010). The evolution of associative learn-
ing: A factor in the Cambrian explosion. Journal of Theoretical 
Biology, 266(1), 11–20. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jtbi.​2010.​06.​017
Goh, J. X., Hall, J. A., & Rosenthal, R. (2016). Mini meta-analysis of 
your own studies: Some arguments on why and a primer on how. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 10(10), 535–549. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​spc3.​12267
Hyman, I. E., & Kleinkneckt, E. E. (1999). False childhood memo-
ries: Research, theory, and applications. In L. M. Williams & 
V. L. Banyard (Eds.), Trauma & memory (pp. 175–199). SAGE 
Publications.
Johnson, M. K., & Sherman, S. J. (1990). Constructing and recon-
structing the past and the future in the present. In E. T. Higgins & 
R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: 
Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 482–526).
Johnson, M. K., Foley, M. A., Suengas, A. G., & Raye, C. L. (1988). 
Phenomenal characteristics of memories for perceived and imag-
ined autobiographical events. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: General, 117(4), 371–376. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0096-​
3445.​117.4.​371
1333

1 3
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source moni-
toring. Psychological Bulletin, 114(1), 3–28. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1037/​0033-​2909.​114.1.3
Klein, S. B., Cosmides, L., Tooby, J., & Chance, S. (2002). Decisions 
and the evolution of memory: Multiple systems, multiple func-
tions. Psychological Review, 109(2), 306–329. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1037/​0033-​295X.​109.2.​306
Laney, C., Morris, E. K., Bernstein, D. M., Wakefield, B. M., & Lof-
tus, E. F. (2008). Asparagus, a love story: Healthier eating could 
be just a false memory away. Experimental Psychology, 55(5), 
291–300. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1027/​1618-​3169.​55.5.​291
Lief, H. I., & Fetkewicz, J. (1995). Retractors of false memories: The 
evolution of pseudo-memories. The Journal of Psychiatry & Law, 
23(3), 411–435. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00931​85395​02300​305
Lind, M., Demiray, B., & Bluck, S. (2019). Identifying distinct sets 
of predictors of specific functions of autobiographical memory. 
Memory, 27(9), 1313–1318. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​211.​
2019.​16397​59
Litman, L., Robinson, J., & Abberbock, T. (2017). TurkPrime.com: A 
versatile crowdsourcing data acquisition platform for the behavio-
ral sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 49(2), 433–442. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13428-​016-​0727-z
Marsh, E. J., & Tversky, B. (2004). Spinning the stories of our lives. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 18(5), 491–503. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1002/​acp.​1001
Mazzoni, G., Loftus, E. F., & Kirsch, I. (2001). Changing beliefs about 
implausible autobiographical events: A little plausibility goes a 
long way. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 7(1), 51. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​1076-​898X.7.​1.​51
Mazzoni, G., Scoboria, A., & Harvey, L. (2010). Nonbelieved memo-
ries. Psychological Science, 21(9), 1334–1340. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1177/​09567​97610​379865
McCann, C. D., & Higgins, T. E. (1992). Personal and contextual fac-
tors in communication: A review of the ‘communication game. In 
G. R. Semin & K. Fiedler (Eds.), Language, interaction and social 
cognition (pp. 144–172). SAGE Publications.
Murphy, G., Loftus, E., Grady, R. H., Levine, L. J., & Greene, C. 
M. (2020). Fool me twice: How effective is debriefing in false 
memory studies? Memory, 28(7), 938–949. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​09658​211.​2020.​18039​17
Nairne, J. S., Pandeirada, J. N. S., & Thompson, S. R. (2008). Adaptive 
memory: The comparative value of survival processing. Psycho-
logical Science, 19(2), 176–180. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1467-​
9280.​2008.​02064.x
Nash, R. A., Wade, K. A., Garry, M., & Adelman, J. S. (2017). A robust 
preference for cheap-and-easy strategies over reliable strategies 
when verifying personal memories. Memory, 25(7), 890–899. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​211.​2016.​12142​80
Ost, J. (2017). Adults’ retractions of childhood sexual abuse allega-
tions: High-stakes and the (in)validation of recollection. Memory, 
25(7), 900–909. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​211.​2016.​11877​57
Otgaar, H., Scoboria, A., & Mazzoni, G. (2015). On the existence and 
implications of nonbelieved memories. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 23(5), 349–354. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
09637​21414​542102
Pillemer, D. B. (1992). Remembering personal circumstances: A func-
tional analysis. In E. Winograd & U. Neisser (Eds.), Affect and 
accuracy in recall: Studies of “flashbulb” memories (Vol. 4, pp. 
236–264). Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​
CBO97​80511​664069.​013
Pillemer, D. B. (2003). Directive functions of autobiographical mem-
ory: The guiding power of the specific episode. Memory, 11(2), 
193–202. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​74193​8208
Pillemer, D. B., Steiner, K. L., Kuwabara, K. J., Thomsen, D. K., & 
Svob, C. (2015). Vicarious memories. Consciousness and Cogni-
tion, 36, 233–245. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​concog.​2015.​06.​010
Rasmussen, A. S., & Berntsen, D. (2009). Emotional valence and the 
functions of autobiographical memories: Positive and negative 
memories serve different functions. Memory & Cognition, 37(4), 
477–492. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​MC.​37.4.​477
Rasmussen, A. S., & Berntsen, D. (2013). The reality of the past versus 
the ideality of the future: Emotional valence and functional dif-
ferences between past and future mental time travel. Memory & 
Cognition, 187–200. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13421-​012-​0260-y
Rimé, B., Philippot, P., Boca, S., & Mesquita, B. (1992). Long-lasting 
cognitive and social consequences of emotion: Social sharing 
and rumination. European Review of Social Psychology, 3(1), 
225–258. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​14792​77924​30000​78
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories: 
Remembering words not presented in lists. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(4), 
803–814. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0278-​7393.​21.4.​803
Roese, N. J. (1994). The functional basis of counterfactual thinking. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66(5), 805–818. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0022-​3514.​66.5.​805
Ross, M., & Wilson, A. E. (2003). Autobiographical memory and 
conceptions of self. Current Directions in Psychological Sci-
ence, 12(2), 66–69. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​1467-​8721.​01228
Rubin, D. C., Schrauf, R. W., & Greenberg, D. L. (2003). Belief and 
recollection of autobiographical memories. Memory & Cogni-
tion, 31(6), 887–901. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​BF031​96443
Rubin, D. C., Schrauf, R. W., & Greenberg, D. L. (2004). Stability in 
autobiographical memories. Memory, 12(6), 715–721. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​21034​40005​12
Rubin, D. C., Dennis, M. F., & Beckham, J. C. (2011). Autobio-
graphical memory for stressful events: The role of autobio-
graphical memory in posttraumatic stress disorder. Conscious-
ness and Cognition, 20(3), 840–856. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
concog.​2011.​03.​015
Rubin, D. C., Deffler, S. A., & Umanath, S. (2019). Scenes enable 
a sense of reliving: Implications for autobiographical memory. 
Cognition, 183, 44–56. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cogni​tion.​
2018.​10.​024
Sanson, M., Newman, E. J., & Garry, M. (2018). The characteristics 
of directive future experiences and directive memories. Psychol-
ogy of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 5(3), 
278–294. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​cns00​00136
Sanson, M., Cardwell, B. A., Rasmussen, A. S., & Garry, M. (2020). 
Evidence that “voluntary” versus “involuntary” retrieval is a 
fluency-based attribution. Psychological Reports, 123(1), 141–
158. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00332​94119​854180
Schacter, D. L., & Madore, K. P. (2016). Remembering the past 
and imagining the future: Identifying and enhancing the con-
tribution of episodic memory. Memory Studies, 9(3), 245–255. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​17506​98016​645230
Schönbrodt, F. D., & Perugini, M. (2013). At what sample size do 
correlations stabilize? Journal of Research in Personality, 
47(5), 609–612. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jrp.​2013.​05.​009
Scoboria, A., Jackson, D. L., Talarico, J., Hanczakowski, M., Wys-
man, L., & Mazzoni, G. (2014). The role of belief in occurrence 
within autobiographical memory. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: General, 143(3), 1242–1258. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​
a0034​110
Scoboria, A., Talarico, J. M., & Pascal, L. (2015). Metamemory 
appraisals in autobiographical event recall. Cognition, 136(2), 
337–349. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cogni​tion.​2014.​11.​028
Scoboria, A., Mazzoni, G., & Boucher, C. (2017a). Nonbelieved 
memories: A review of findings and theoretical implications. In 
R. A. Nash & J. Ost (Eds.), False and distorted memories (pp. 
115–129). Routledge.
Scoboria, A., Nash, R. A., & Mazzoni, G. (2017b). Sub-types of non-
believed memories reveal differential outcomes of challenges to 
1334

1 3
memories. Memory, 25(7), 876–889. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​
09658​211.​2016.​12034​37
Suddendorf, T., & Corballis, M. C. (2007). The evolution of foresight: 
What is mental time travel, and is it unique to humans? Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 30(3), 299–313.
Taylor, A., Jordan, K., Zajac, R., Takarangi, M. K. T., & Garry, M. 
(2020). Judgments of memory coherence depend on the condi-
tions under which a memory is retrieved, regardless of reported 
PTSD symptoms. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and 
Cognition. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jarmac.​2020.​07.​003
Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychology, 
26(1), 1–12. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​h0080​017
Wade, K. A., Nash, R. A., & Garry, M. (2014). People consider reli-
ability and cost when verifying their autobiographical memories. 
Acta Psychologica, 146(1), 28–34. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​act-
psy.​2013.​12.​001
Wang, J., Otgaar, H., Howe, M. L., Smeets, T., Merckelbach, H., & 
Nahouli, Z. (2017). Undermining belief in false memories leads 
to less efficient problem-solving behaviour. Memory, 25(7), 910–
921. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09658​211.​2016.​12498​88
Williams, K. D. (2007). Ostracism. Annual Review of Psychology, 
58(1), 425–452. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev.​psych.​58.​110405.​
085641
Wilson, A., & Ross, M. (2003). The identity function of autobio-
graphical memory: Time is on our side. Memory, 11(2), 137–149. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​74193​8210
Yang, B. W. (2018). Fiction as autobiography (doctoral dissertation, 
Duke University). Duke University. https://​doi.​org/​10.​31237/​osf.​
io/​th6j2
Open practices statement Experiments 1, 3, and 4 were preregistered. 
The preregistrations, materials, and data for all four experiments are 
available on the Open Science Framework (https://​osf.​io/​q3sjm/). Our 
ethical approval precludes us from making subjects’ written responses 
publicly available, but these responses are available on request.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
1335