HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 18 July 2017
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01207
1
Edited by:
Luca Barlassina,
University of Sheffield, United
Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Santiago Arango-Munoz,
University of Antioquia, Colombia
Sarah Robins,
University of Kansas, United States
*Correspondence:
Sven Bernecker
s.bernecker@uci.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 06 March 2017
Accepted: 03 July 2017
Published: 18 July 2017
Citation:
Bernecker S (2017) A Causal Theory
of Mnemonic Confabulation.
Front. Psychol. 8:1207.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01207
A Causal Theory of Mnemonic
Confabulation
Sven Bernecker 1, 2*
1 Department of Philosophy, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States, 2 Department of Philosophy, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany
This paper attempts to answer the question of what defines mnemonic confabulation vis-
à-vis genuine memory. The two extant accounts of mnemonic confabulation as “false
memory” and as ill-grounded memory are shown to be problematic, for they cannot
account for the possibility of veridical confabulation, ill-grounded memory, and well-
grounded confabulation. This paper argues that the defining characteristic of mnemonic
confabulation is that it lacks the appropriate causal history. In the confabulation case,
there is no proper counterfactual dependence of the state of seeming to remember on
the corresponding past representation.
Keywords: false memory, forgetting, misremembering, relearning, knowledge, justification, counterfactuals
Memory errors can be grouped into two categories: errors from omissions and errors from
commission. Omissions are forgetting errors. Commissions are “false memories.” Confabulation
is a kind of commission error that occurs when patients produce stories that fill in gaps in their
memories1. Different neurological syndromes are known to cause confabulation. Among them
are Korsakoff’s syndrome (memory disorder caused by lack of vitamin B1 often due to chronic
alcohol abuse), split-brain syndrome, anosognosia for hemiplegia (denial of paralysis), Anton’s
syndrome (denial of blindness), and Capgras syndrome (the illusion that an impostor has replaced
a person close to the patient). Confabulation can also occur in healthy adults and young children.
Children sometime offer narratives of fabricated events that are so plausible and convincing that
even professional child psychologists cannot distinguish from proper memories (Ceci, 1995; Ackil
and Zaragoza, 1998). Subjects under hypnosis may confabulate when they are asked to recall
information (Dywan, 1995). Moreover, there are a number of experiments that suggest that we
sometimes claim to remember having experienced events that we have only imagined (Ceci, 1995;
Hyman et al., 1995).
What distinguishes confabulations from delusions? Some consider delusional beliefs to be a
non-memorial form of confabulation (Coltheart and Turner, 2009), others consider delusions
to be false or ill-grounded beliefs while confabulations are false or ill-grounded claims (Hirstein,
2005, p. 18), and yet others claim that delusions are acceptances as opposed to beliefs (Dub, 2017).
Regardless of whether delusions are beliefs, claims, or acceptances, there are two main differences
between confabulations and delusions. First, confabulations can be coherent with the rest of the
subject’s beliefs while delusions are typically not. The possible coherence of confabulations is
discussed in Section “Against the Epistemic Theory of Confabulation”. Second, delusions, but not
confabulations, are necessarily resistant to counterevidence and impervious to counterargument
(Dub, 2017).
1The technical term “confabulation” was coined by Karl Bonhoeffer, Arnold Pick, and Carl Wernicke in the early 1900s and
was applied to patients with Korsakoff’s syndrome (Berrios, 1998). “Fabrication,” “false memory,” and “pseudo reminiscence”
are sometimes used to mean the same thing as “confabulation.”

Bernecker
Needless to say, not all confabulations concern the past and
not all of them arise from failures in the memory system.
Confabulations may also occur within the perceptual and
affective modules. That said, the primary focus of this paper is
on mnemonic confabulation.
The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM for short), the
“bible” for psychiatric diagnosis, does not explicitly define
confabulation but states that confabulation is “often evidenced
by the recitation of imaginary events to fill in gaps in
memory” (The American Psychiatric Association, 1994, p. 157).
According to this definition, the hallmark of confabulation
is that it is fictitious. While falsity might be a sufficient
condition for confabulation, it is not necessary. Not every “false
memory” qualifies as confabulation. Another characteristic of
confabulation, besides falsity, is that the subject is unaware
that she is confabulating, and takes the “false memory” to be
accurate. Most definitions of confabulation list falsity and the
absence of deceptive intent as individually necessary and jointly
sufficient conditions for confabulation. Consider the following
definitions:
Confabulations are inaccurate or false narrative purporting to
convey information about the world or self (Berrios, 2000, p. 348).
Confabulation is a symptom which is sometimes found in
amnesic patients and consists in involuntary and unconscious
production of “false memories,” that is the recollection of
episodes, which never actually happened, or which occurred in a
different temporal-spatial context to that being referred to by the
patient (Dalla Barba, 2002, p. 28).
Confabulations are typically understood to represent instances
of false beliefs: opinions about the world that are manifestly
incorrect and yet are held by the patient to be true in spite of
clearly presented evidence to the contrary (Turnbull et al., 2004,
p. 6).
In the broad sense confabulations are usually defined as false
narratives or statements about the world and/or self-due to some
pathological mechanism or factors, but with no intention of lying
(Örulv and Hydén, 2006, p. 648).
Confabulations are false memories produced without conscious
knowledge of their falsehood (Fotopoulou, 2008, p. 543).
What
all
of
these
definitions
have
in
common
is
the
focus on epistemic surface features such as belief, truth,
evidence, knowledge, intention. None of these definitions
makes reference to the underlying mechanisms that are
causally responsible for confabulation. The reason is that
there
are
numerous
neuropsychological
conditions
that
can
give
rise
to
confabulation
and
that
confabulation
can
also
occur
without
a
(known)
neuropsychological
deficit2.
2Gilboa et al. (2006, p. 1411). According to Carruthers (2009), it is our
mindreading capacity that is responsible for all kinds of confabulations, not only
mnemonic confabulations.
The standard definition of confabulation as “false memory”
produced without awareness of its falsity is problematic for
three reasons: first, not all confabulations are wholly false; some
are partially true and partially false. Second, it is possible that
a confabulation is wholly true but still epistemically defective
because it is true merely by accident. Third, according to some,
genuine memories need not be completely accurate. Given that
(episodic) remembering is an inherently constructive process,
memory contents may be false to some degree. Given that
confabulations may be true by luck and that genuine memories
need not be wholly true, the standard definition fails to draw a
strict line of demarcation between memories and confabulations.
In light of the problems with the standard definition of
confabulation, some have proposed an epistemic definition
of confabulation as ill-grounded or unjustified memory (cf.
Hirstein, 2005, ch. 8; Michaelian, 2016b, p. 5–7). The epistemic
account of confabulation promises to avoid the problems of the
standard account by making room for veridical confabulation
and for partially false memory. But the epistemic account too
blurs the distinction genuine memory and confabulation, for
there are genuine memories that are ill-grounded (unjustified) as
well as properly justified confabulations.
This paper argues that what defines confabulation vis-à-vis
genuine memory is not that it is false or ill-grounded but
that it lacks the appropriate causal history. The hallmark of
confabulations is that they fail to satisfy the causal condition on
remembering.
To avoid misunderstandings, it is worth addressing a general
worry that one might have about philosophical attempts to define
medical terms like “confabulation.3” The fact that the DSM
does not explicitly define confabulation and that the literature
on the topic contains a number of different definitions can
be taken to suggest that the medical profession is still in the
process of coming up with a precise definition of the concept
of confabulation. But if this is so then it seems premature for
philosophy to try to define confabulation. Maybe philosophy
should refrain from defining the term “confabulation” until
after the medical sciences have clearly identified the phenomena
denoted by it.
This paper is to be understood as a friendly offer of help
to the medical sciences. Philosophy is, as James (1987, p. 296)
noted, “an unusually stubborn effort to think clearly.” As such
philosophy is well-positioned to offer novel perspectives on issues
in psychiatric classification (see Sadler et al., 1994; Perring, 2010).
I would be pleased if the causal theory of confabulation developed
in this paper proves to be a useful contribution to the ongoing
pursuit to come up with a medical definition of confabulation
that is both precise and exhaustive.
Section “The Constructive Nature of Memory” argues that
a memory state must be factual in the sense of accurately
representing the objective reality and “authentic” in the
sense of resembling the subject’s initial perception of reality.
Section “Confabulation without Falsehood” argues against the
standard conception of confabulation as “false memory” by
pointing out that confabulations may be veridical. Section
3I am grateful to a reviewer for pressing me on this point.
2

Bernecker
“Against the Epistemic Theory of Confabulation” criticizes
the epistemic conception of confabulation by pointing out
that there are properly grounded (justified) confabulations.
Section “The Causal Theory of Memory” explains the causal
condition on remembering and Section “A Causal Theory of
Mnemonic Confabulation” argues that the distinctive feature of
confabulations is that they fail to meet the causal condition.
Section “Confabulating, Misremembering, and Relearning”
discusses the clinical utility of the causal theory of mnemonic
confabulation vis-à-vis some of its competitors.
THE CONSTRUCTIVE NATURE OF
MEMORY
According to the standard conception of memory in philosophy,
propositional memory works like a photocopier producing
duplicates of past propositional attitudes4. The content of a
memory state must be type-identical to the content of the original
propositional attitude from which it causally derives. This xerox
model of memory goes back to antiquity. In the Theaetetus, Plato
(1921, 191c8-e) compares (phenomenal) memory to a block of
wax in which the perceptions are imprinted in the same way
“as we might stamp the impression of a seal ring. Whatever is
rubbed out or has not succeeded in leaving an impression we
have forgotten and so do not know.” The wax tablet metaphor
is taken up by Aristotle (1972) in De Memoria (450a, p. 28–
32)5. Augustine (1991, p. 191) calls the memory the “belly of the
mind” and compares it to “a large and boundless inner hall,” a
“storehouse,” and a “vast cave” within which “the images of things
perceived” are laid away, to be “brought forth when there is need
for them.” Similarly, Hume (2000, p. 12) maintains that memory
is about the re-experiencing of mental images that are copies of
the original experience. He goes so far as to claim that “memory
preserves the original form, in which its objects were presented,
and that wherever we depart from it in recollecting anything, it
proceeds from some defect or imperfection in that faculty.”
The xerox model of memory is at odds with what science tells
us about the workings of memory. Instead of being etched in
a wax-tablet-like stable form long-term memories are retained
by a miniature molecular process that must run constantly to
maintain the memories; jamming this process can erase long-
term memories (cf. Shema et al., 2007). Furthermore, it has been
shown that memory is not only a passive device for reproducing
contents but also an active device for processing stored contents.
The psychologist Engel explains:
4I take the term “propositional memory” to refer to any substituend of the schema
“S remembers that p,” irrespective of whether “p” refers to something one has
personally experienced, and irrespective of whether the memory content consists
merely of the proposition p or whether, in addition, it includes images and qualia.
In other words, propositional memories can be both episodic and semantic.
5I don’t mean to suggest that Plato and Aristotle endorse the xerox model of
memory. The wax tablet metaphor is propounded to clarify the relationship
between perceiving and knowing without implying that this is all that is involved in
memorizing and recall. Nevertheless, the metaphor illustrates the dangers of being
captured by the attractions of a picture. Most classical and medieval writers seem
to have been satisfied with the wax tablet as a model of memory.
One creates the memory at the moment one needs it, rather than
merely pulling out an intact item, image, or story. This suggests
that each time we say or imagine something from our past we are
putting it together from bits and pieces that may have, until now,
been stored separately. Herein lies the reason why it is the rule
rather than the exception for people to change, add, and delete
things from a remembered event (Engel, 1999, p. 6).
Given the constructive nature of retrieval in memory, the
question arises as to what extent two propositional attitude
tokens may be different from one another and one of them
still is memory-related to the other. If remembering does not
require the duplication of past propositional attitudes, what is the
permissible range of aberration between a propositional attitude
and the memory thereof? To answer this question, it is useful to
group the ways in which our memory processes contents into two
categories: mnemonic processes that, when working properly,
preserve the truth-value of the encoded content and mnemonic
processes that change the truth-values of the encoded contents6.
Examples of mnemonic processes of the former kind are leveling,
cognitive dynamics, and boundary extension. Leveling refers to
the loss of details, the condensation of elements, and the general
simplification of the information encoded in memory7. Leveling
preserves the truth of the encoded content, for, say, if it is true
that there is a blue jay sitting in the mulberry tree, then it is
true that there is a bird sitting in the tree8. “Cognitive dynamics”
is Kaplan’s (1989) term for the ability to vary a judgment so
as to manifest a single persisting belief. When you keep track
of someone or something as you (or both) of you move or as
time passes by, you must vary the indexicals and tensed verbs
in a judgment so as still to express the same belief as before.
Boundary extension is the phenomenon in which a subject claims
to remember seeing a surrounding region of a scene that was
not visible in the studied view. Although boundary extension is
an error of commission with respect to the stimulus (and thus
violates the authenticity condition discussed below), it is more
often than not a reliable prediction of the world that did exist just
beyond the edges of the subject’s original view9.
Some mnemonic processes, even when working properly,
change the truth-values of the encoded contents. Cases in
point are misattribution, suggestibility, and confabulation.
Misattribution involves assigning a memory to the wrong source:
6This distinction does not align with the distinction between omission errors and
commission errors. Schacter (2001) distinguishes three kinds of omission errors—
transience, absent-mindedness, blocking —and four kinds of commission errors—
misattribution, suggestibility, bias, and persistence. Omission errors may or may
not change the truth-values of the encoded contents.
7The concept of leveling has its roots in Gestalt psychology. Gestalt psychologists
contrasted leveling with sharpening, in which a person exaggerates selected
characteristics of the encoded content. See Kellogg (2012, p. 158).
8Leveling may not preserve the falsity of the encoded content. Suppose you
believed that there is a bird in the tree but it is in fact a cat. If what you remember
is that there was an animal in the tree then leveling has transformed a false into a
true belief.
9Hubbard et al. (2010), Michaelian (2011b, p. 325–326), and Michaelian (2011a, p.
123). Boundary extension is taken to be a consequence of the fact that information
about the likely layout of the scene is automatically retrieved and then incorporated
into the memory of the scene. So the content of the memory is a combination of
the stored content and some additional content.
3

Bernecker
mistaking fantasy for reality, or incorrectly remembering that,
say, a friend told you a bit of trivia that you actually read about in
a newspaper. Suggestibility refers to memories that are implanted
as a result of leading questions, comments, or suggestions when
a subject is trying to remember something.
The question has been raised before as to what extent two
propositional attitude tokens may be different from one another
and one of them still be memory-related to the other. Elsewhere
Bernecker (2010, p. 36–9, 213–239) I argue that for a mental state
to qualify as a memory it must accurately represent the objective
reality and resemble the subject’s initial perception of reality.
Memories must be veridical in the sense of being factually correct
and they must be authentic in the sense of accurately reflecting
the subject’s past viewpoint. A memory counts as authentic if it
stems from a truth-preserving process such as leveling, cognitive
dynamics, and boundary extension (On this view, one can fail to
remember something not only because there is something wrong
with one’s memory but also because the representation fed into
the memory process is false. Memory neither allows for a mistake
of inheritance nor for the inheritance of a mistake.).
In Bernecker (2010, ch. 8) I argue that non-inferential
remembering-that allows for the contents of the past and present
representations not to be type-identical but only sufficiently
similar. A memory content is sufficiently similar to the content
of one’s prior mental state so as to count as an instance of
non-inferential remembering (provided all the other memory
conditions are met) if it must be either identical to, or relevantly
entailed by, the original content10. The so-called entailment
thesis is perfectly compatible with the veridicality constraint
on remembering. The reason is that the entailment relation
preserves truth. If the contents fed into the memory process
are veridical and there are no external circumstances changing
the truth-values of the contents while they are in storage, the
entailment thesis ensures that the retrieved contents are veridical
as well. And since each proposition entails itself the entailment
thesis also allows for cases where our memory works like a
photocopier producing duplicates of past propositional attitudes.
The view whereby remembering requires both truth and
authenticity is not shared by everyone in the field. Some drop the
truth condition and merely require that memories be authentic
(e.g., Newby and Ross, 1996). Others weaken the truth condition
by maintaining that memories only need to contain some truths
but need not be completely true. Bernstein and Loftus, for
example, write:
All human memory is false to some degree. Memory is inherently
a reconstructive process, whereby we piece together the past to
10The notion of relevant entailment is meant to ensure that the content of the
present propositional attitude is not on a completely different topic than the
content of the past propositional attitude. According to Anderson and Belnap
(1975), p is relevant to q if and only if p could be used in a deductive argument
of q from p. They reject, for instance, p ⊃(q ⊃q) because p may be irrelevant to
(q ⊃q) in the sense that p is not used in arriving to (q ⊃q). To infer q from p it
is necessary that p and q have some common meaning content. Since Anderson
and Belnap hold that in propositional logic commonality of meaning is carried by
commonality of propositional variables, they conclude that p and q should share at
least one propositional variable.
form a coherent narrative that becomes our autobiography. In the
process of reconstructing the past, we color and shape our life’s
experiences based on what we know about the world11.
Similarly, Conway and Loveday declare:
All memories are to some degree false in the sense that they do not
represent past experience literally.... One of the main functions
of memories is to generate meanings, personal meanings, that
allow us to make sense of the world and operate on it adaptively.
Memories are, perhaps, most important in supporting a wide
range social interactions where coherence is predominant and
correspondence often less central12.
To be sure, there is a crucial difference between saying, as I
do, that memories must be veridical even though they need
not amount to the exact reproduction of some previously
recorded content and saying, as the above mentioned authors
do, that memories need not be (completely) true. There is
general agreement that the human memory is meant to not only
store but also process the encoded information. As a result of
such information processing, the content of the memory state
may differ, to some degree, from the content of the original
propositional attitude from which the memory causally derives.
The dispute is about the degree to which memory may change
the encoded contents. In what follows, I presuppose that a mental
state qualifies as a memory only if it accurately represents the
objective reality and accords with the subject’s initial perception
of reality.
CONFABULATION WITHOUT FALSEHOOD
The aim of this section is to challenge the standard definition of
confabulation as “false memory” by arguing that confabulations
may meet the authenticity constraint and that they may
accurately represent the objective reality.
Different classification schemes for kinds of confabulation
have been proposed in the literature. According to Schnider
(2008, p. 63–64), there are four kinds of confabulation: (1)
Intrusions in memory tests are occasional distortions when a
subject is asked to recall the details of a story. (2) Momentary
confabulations are false verbal statements in a discussion or
another situation inciting a patient to make a comment. These
confabulations are inherently plausible but frequently false. (3)
Fantastic confabulations have no basis in reality and, unlike
momentary confabulations, are inconceivable, non-sensical,
and implausible. (4) Behaviorally spontaneous confabulation
constitutes a syndrome composed of momentary and fantastic
confabulation, amnesia, and disorientation. The hallmark of this
11Bernstein and Loftus (2009, p. 373). Given that knowledge implies truth, “what
we know about the world” is true.
12Conway and Loveday (2015, p. 580). “The healthy human brain is not a veridical
recorder of events but rather a meaning machine that fills gaps, rearranges time and
space, delays conscious experience, and generates false explanations via available
cultural theories. To confabulate is human” (Wheatley, 2009, p. 219). “Commonly,
memories can be true without being perfectly accurate or verbatim reports of past
events” (Sutton, 2003, p. 146).
4

Bernecker
type of confabulation is that the patients act according to their
confabulations.
Fantastic and behaviorally spontaneous confabulations are
patently false, self-contradictory, and bizarre. Intrusions and
momentary confabulations, on the other hand, may be “coherent,
internally consistent, and relatively commonplace” (Moscovitch,
1995, p. 226–227)13. These kinds of confabulations tend to
be coherent not only at a particular time but over a longer
period of time. It has frequently been observed that patients
persist in their confabulations even in the face of evidence to
the contrary14. And given that internal consistency is a crucial
component of authenticity, it is not unreasonable to suppose
that confabulations may satisfy the authenticity constraint
characteristic of remembering.
Just as confabulations need not be inconsistent, they need
not misrepresent the objective reality. It is conceivable that
confabulations contain few or no falsehoods (Michaelian, 2016b,
p. 4). Confabulations having to do with autobiographical
information may reference actual states of affairs, but only
miscontextualize them in time (Talland, 1965, p. 56; Dalla Barba
et al., 1990). A mother may, for instance, rightly recollect that
she has children, but not recall that they have grown up and left
home. A piece of confabulation may even be entirely correct. It is
possible that a patient fantasizes correctly by telling a story that,
by sheer luck, represents the objective reality. A confabulatory
hypochondriac, for instance, may seem to remember having had
thyroid cancer with little or no evidence. The truth is, however,
that he did have thyroid cancer but it was never detected. McKay
and Kinsbourne imagine a subject who lacks “access to his
biographical information, yet by chance may confabulate the
correct answer when asked his age” (McKay and Kinsbourne,
2010, p. 289; cf. Berlyne, 1972, p. 32 cited in Hirstein, 2005, p.
9). The upshot is that it cannot be ruled out that confabulations
meet not only the authenticity condition but also the veridicality
condition of memory.
In sum, a confabulatory process can lead to the formation
of either a true or a false representation. So while the notion of
“false memory” is familiar enough but an oxymoron the notion
of “veridical confabulation” is unfamiliar but denotes a possible
situation.
AGAINST THE EPISTEMIC THEORY OF
CONFABULATION
In light of the problems facing the standard definition
of confabulation as “false memory” some have proposed
that the key feature of confabulations is that they are ill-
grounded, poorly supported by evidence, or unjustified (I
use “justification” to refer to that, whatever precisely it is,
13Talland (1965, p. 49) also characterizes confabulations as “more or less coherent
and internally consistent.” And Van Damme and d’Ydewalle (1965, p. 212) declare:
“As [momentary] confabulation is considered coherent and internally consistent,
and mainly comprises true memories being displaced in time and context, it closely
resembles the type of memory distortion we all sometimes produce.”
14Dalla Barba (1993, p. 10), DeLuca (2001, p. 121), and Moscovitch (1989, p.
135–136).
which together with truth makes the difference between
knowledge and mere true belief. In this sense, reliability
is a kind of justification.) The obvious advantage of such
an epistemic account of confabulation over the standard
account is that it can handle cases of veridical and consistent
confabulation.
Whether the notion of confabulation as “false memory”
is distinct from the notion of confabulation as unjustified
memory depends on where one stands with respect to the
debate between fallibilism and infallibilism about justification.
Infallibilism is the view that a belief cannot be at once justified
and false. Complete justification necessitates or entails truth.
Infallibilism is a minority view because it is thought to lead
to skepticism. Since only on rare occasions our evidence for
some proposition guarantees that it is true, infallibilism seems
to have the counterintuitive consequence that justification is a
rare commodity. If we can know things only on the basis of
deductive arguments, then very few of the things we ordinarily
believe on the basis of inductive, perceptual or testimonial
evidence qualify as knowledge. This is why most epistemologists
endorse some version of fallibilism. According to fallibilism,
it is possible that a belief is completely justified yet false
and that a belief is true yet unjustified15. Given fallibilism,
there is a marked difference between the standard account of
confabulation as “false memory” and the epistemic account of
confabulation as unjustified memory. In what follows, I assume
fallibilism.
Bortolotti (2010, p. 44–45) motivates the epistemic notion of
confabulation as follows:
What seems to be relevant to the detection of the phenomena
of confabulation and delusion is not whether the reported state
is true, but whether its content conflicts with other things the
subject believes, or is held with a level of conviction that is not
explained by its plausibility or the evidential support available
for it.
The foremost advocates of the epistemic notion of confabulation
are Hirstein (2005, ch. 8) and Michaelian (2016b, p. 5–7). Hirstein
maintains that the hallmark of confabulation “is not the falsity
itself, but that the claims are being produced by a malfunctioning
cognitive system, which is producing ill-grounded thoughts.”
Hirstein goes on to propose the following conceptual analysis: Jan
confabulates that p if and only if
(i) Jan claims that p; (ii) Jan believes that p; (iii) Jan’s thought
that p is ill-grounded; (iv) Jan does not know that her thought
is ill-grounded; (v) Jan should know that her thought is ill-
grounded; (vi) Jan is confident that p (Hirstein, 2005, p.
187).
Michaelian’s approach to confabulation is broadly in line with
Hirstein’s definition in terms of the notion of ill-groundedness.
But while Hirstein’s notion of justification combines internalist
and externalist elements, Michaelian defines justification from an
externalist-reliabilist perspective. He writes:
15For
the
fallibilism/infallibilism
distinction
see
Dougherty
(2011)
and
Hetherington (2017).
5

Bernecker
Confabulation... occurs when the subject’s episodic memory
system
function
unreliably.
When
the
system
functions
unreliably, it will usually produce an inaccurate representation.
In cases where an unreliably functioning memory system
produced an inaccurate representation, the subject can be said to
confabulate falsidically... In cases where an unreliably functioning
memory system produces an accurate representation, the subject
can be said to confabulate veridically (Michaelian, 2016b, p. 6).
There are three problems with the epistemic account
of confabulation in general and with Hirstein’s account in
particular. Let us discuss these problems in turn.
The first problem concerns condition (iv) which is supposed
to capture the idea that the confabulatory patient has no intention
of lying16. As stated, condition (iv) is too weak since it only rules
out cases where the confabulator does not know that her thought
is ill-grounded. This condition is satisfied when the confabulator
believes that her thought is ill-grounded but where she lacks
sufficient reasons for her belief and hence does not qualify as
knowing that her thought is ill-grounded. A subject may not
know that her thought is ill-grounded because her belief to the
effect that her thought is ill-grounded is not true, is not justified
or because it is gettierized. A simple solution to th problem at
hand is to strengthen condition (iv) as follows:
(iv∗) Jan does not (justifiedly) believe that her thought is
ill-grounded.
Instead of only requiring that the confabulator does not know
that her thought is ill-grounded condition (iv∗) demands that the
confabulator does not even (justifiedly) believe that her thought
is ill-grounded17. Condition (iv∗) seems to be doing a better job
of capturing the gist of what Hirstein has in mind.
Another problem with Hirstein’s account of confabulation
concerns condition (v) which states that Jan should know that
her thought is ill-grounded: “if the confabulator’s brain were
functioning properly, she would know that the claim is ill-
grounded and not make it” (Hirstein, 2009, p. 652)18. Given
that ought implies can, condition (v) rules out cases where
the subject is not in a position to know that her belief is ill-
grounded because the grounds for the belief are not accessible
16Although the degree of conviction manifested in confabulation varies (DeLuca,
2001, p. 121; Schnider, 2008, p. 70–71), it is usually thought that patients are
typically sincere in their confabulations, and are unaware of their inaccuracies
(Johnson et al., 2000, p. 383; Moscovitch, 1995, p. 226; Ramachandran, 1995, p.
28–32).
17I am assuming the standard conception of knowledge whereby knowledge
involves belief. Williamson (2000) and others have suggested reversing the order
of explanation between knowledge and belief: instead of analyzing knowledge in
terms of belief, the concept of knowledge should be used to elucidate the concept
of belief.
18Hirstein (2005, p. 225–226) argues that the word ‘should’ is to be interpreted
differently if the person has brain damage, or has a normal brain. If the person has
brain damage, Hirstein claims that ‘should’ is to be interpreted in a functional sense
(as in “the motor should work, it’s got power”). If the person has a normal brain,
‘should’ is, additionally, to be interpreted in a normative sense, in which the person
is held responsible for failing to correct the thought, or at least that he does not
have knowledge. However, in both types of cases, should implies can. See Sinnott-
Armstrong (1984). My discussion of Hirstein’s condition (v) follows Bortolotti and
Cox (2009, p. 956–961).
via introspection and reflection. To illustrate this point, consider
a much cited study by Nisbett and Wilson (1977) where normal
subjects were asked to provide their reasons for selecting the best
pair of nylon pantyhose from an array of identical pantyhose.
Participants selected the pantyhose on the right and produced
confabulated explanations referencing its particular features (the
knit, elasticity, sheerness, etc.) rather than its position on the
vending table. Speakers of Indo-European languages read from
left to right and so tend to scan the field of vision from left
to right. Whatever is on the far right is seen last and has a
preeminent status in regard to choice. Yet the participants denied
that their choice was influenced by position. The point is that
the participants in the experiment had no obligation to know
why they preferred the rightmost pantyhose because they lacked
introspective access to the causes of their choices. This indicates
that condition (v) is too stringent. Note that condition (v) would
still be too stringent if it stated that the confabulator should
believe (as opposed to know) that her thought is ill-grounded19.
Hyponotic suggestion provides another example of people
reporting ill-grounded beliefs without being aware that their
beliefs are ill-grounded. In an experiment conducted by
Rahmanovic et al. (2012) and reported by Bortolotti and Cox
(2009, p. 959) hypnotized participants received a suggestion that
their non-dominant hand and arm belongs to someone else and
they were instructed to forget the fact that the hypnotist gave
them this suggestion. The hypnotized participants were then
asked to pick up objects on a tray located next to the arm targeted
by the suggestion. If they used the arm not targeted by the
suggestion they were asked why they used this arm. They offered
confabulated reasons such as “my other arm is stuck” or “my
other arm is paralyzed.” The participants were also challenged by
being asking what they would say if a doctor examined their arm
and found that the arm was normal and that it belonged to the
participant. Some of the participants commented that the doctor
would be wrong. Since the participants in the experiment lacked
awareness of why their arm felt differently they were not in a
position to know or believe that their beliefs were ill-grounded.
The upshot is once again that Hirstein’s condition (v) is too
stringent.
One might be tempted to handle ought-implies-can based
objections to condition (v) by adding an “under normal
conditions” clause. The revised condition then reads:
(v∗) Jan should know under normal conditions that her
thought is ill-grounded.
Yet the problem with condition (v∗) is that there are many
normal (non-pathological) situations where it is psychologically
impossible for a subject to become aware of the ill-groundedness
of her thoughts. Cases in point include implicit biases and
stereotypes. Presumably Hirstein will want to exclude ordinary
biases and stereotypes from the definition of confabulation.
But then the “under normal conditions” phrase is tantamount
19The interpretation whereupon the subjects in Nisbett’s and Wilson’s experiment
are confabulating is due to Carruthers (2005, p. 142–147). To be fair, it should be
mentioned that Hirstein (2005, p. 189) is aware that his definition of confabulation
does not provide necessary conditions.
6

Bernecker
to “in non-confabulatory situations” and the definition of
confabulation turns out to be circular.
The third and most serious problem with the epistemic notion
of confabulation concerns condition (iii) which characterizes
confabulatory thoughts as ill-grounded or unjustified. Condition
(iii), unlike condition (v), is an essential component of any
epistemic account of confabulation. There are two kinds of
counterexamples to the thesis that confabulations, but not
memories, are ill-grounded: it is possible for genuine memories to
be unjustified and for confabulations to be justified. The epistemic
account therefore fails to differentiate between confabulation and
memory.
The most compelling cases of memory without justification
are ones where the subject remembers that p but where there
is some defeating information such that, if the subject became
aware of it, she would no longer be justified in believing p20.
This is not the place to argue on behalf of the necessity of a
no-defeater condition for justification. In addition to the sheer
plausibility of the view that justification is incompatible with the
presence of undefeated defeaters, the literature is dominated by
endorsements of no-defeater conditions. Despite the great variety
of conceptions of epistemic justification, philosophers on both
sides of the internalism/externalism divide sign up to the idea
that justification is incompatible with undefeated defeaters. In
the case of epistemic internalism, it is obvious that the presence
of undefeated defeaters undermines justification. For if what
justifies a belief is a mentally accessible item (something that
one can come to know whether it obtains just by reflecting on
one’s mental states), being justified in believing p must exclude
a person’s having sufficient reasons for supposing either that p is
false or that the belief that p is not grounded or produced in a way
that is sufficiently truth-indicating.
Whether the presence of undefeated defeaters is compatible
with the externalist construal of justification depends on the
version of externalism under consideration. Given an austere
form of epistemic externalism, a subject is epistemically justified
in believing something just in case the belief is truth-effective;
it doesn’t matter whether the subject takes his belief to be
unjustified. As long as one relies on what is, in point of fact, a
good reason for p, one is justified in believing that p, despite being
convinced that p is false or despite being convinced that the belief
that p is unreliably formed. This position is labeled “mad-dog
reliabilism” in Dretske (2000, p. 595). For reasons I don’t have
space to go into here mad-dog reliabilism is generally rejected.
All of the leading advocates of externalist reliabilism—Alvin
Goldman, Robert Nozick, and Alvin Plantinga, to mention only
a few—adopt no-defeater conditions. They hold that although a
subject need not be aware of the factors that justify his belief,
he may not be aware of evidence that undermines his belief.
20The claim that genuine memories may be unjustified flies in the face of the
widespread epistemic theory of memory whereby remembering that p implies
knowing that p. If memory implies knowledge and if knowledge implies
justification, it follows (by transitivity of implication) that memory implies belief,
truth, and justification. The epistemic theory of memory is endorsed, among
others, by Anscombe (1981), Ayer (1956, p. 138, 147–148), Dretske and Yourgrau
(1983), Huemer (1999), Pollock and Cruz (1999, p. 46–48), Shoemaker (2003, p.
43), and Williamson (2000, p. 37–38).
And there is no inconsistency in affirming that what confers
justification on a belief is an externalist condition, but what
takes justification away from a belief is an internalist no-defeater
condition. The no-defeater condition ensures that for a belief to
become justified it must not be incoherent with the background
information the subject possesses.
In light of these preliminary points consider the following case
of remembering without justification. At t1, Jill came to know
that John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 196321. At t2, Jill’s
friends play a practical joke on her. They tell her that Kennedy
was assassinated in 1964 and present her with plausible but
misleading evidence to this effect. Given the incompatibility of
justification with the presence of undefeated defeaters, Jill doesn’t
know at t2 that Kennedy was assassinated in 1963. The reason
she doesn’t know this is because she is unable to rule out the
relevant alternative that Kennedy was not assassinated until 1964.
Jill fails to know that Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, despite
the fact that she still remembers this fact from what she knew at
t1. This example suggests that one can remember what one knew
but doesn’t know anymore—even though one continues to truly
believe it—for the reason that one isn’t any more fully justified in
believing it22.
As mentioned above, there are two kinds of counterexamples
to the thesis that confabulations, but not memories, are
unjustified. The first kind of counterexamples concerned
unjustified
memories;
the
second
kind
concerns
justified
confabulations. Depending on how the notion of justification is
construed, confabulations may qualify as being properly justified.
As was explained in Section “The Constructive Nature of
Memory”, the phenomenon of boundary extension (an error of
commission) tends to be remarkably accurate, so much so that
Michaelian (2016b, p. 123) claims that “boundary extension need
not reduce the reliability of remembering.” And since Michaelian
endorses reliabilism about justification, it follows that, by his
own lights, there are mnemonic confabulations that meet the
justification condition.
Hirstein (2005, p. 207) follows Goldman (1998) in demanding
that a justified belief not only be based in a reliable belief-forming
process but also that and there be no reliable or conditionally
reliable process available to the subject which, had it been used
by the subject in addition to the process actually used, would have
resulted in his not believing p. Given this version of reliabilism,
it is highly unlikely that there could be confabulations that meet
the justification condition.
The two advocates of the epistemic theory of confabulation,
Hirstein and Michaelian endorse reliabilism about justification.
Yet it is possible to combine the epistemic theory of confabulation
also with other accounts of justification. According to the
coherence theory of justification, for example, a belief is
justified in virtue of belonging to a coherent system of
belief. And for a system of beliefs to be coherent, the beliefs
21The value of the index in the subscript to “t” determines whether the time
referred to is in the past or the present: the relatively biggest number indicates
the present. So here “t2” is the present and “t1” is the past.
22Cf. Bernecker (2010, p. 71–83, 2011, p. 112–116). For dissenting views see Adams
(2011) and Moon (2013).
7

Bernecker
that make up that system must cohere with one another23.
Typically, coherence is taken to involve three components:
logical consistency, explanatory relations, and various inductive
(non-explanatory) relations. As was explained in Section
“Confabulation without Falsehood”, confabulations can be
“coherent, internally consistent, and relatively commonplace”
(Moscovitch, 1995, 226–227). Given that the justification of a
belief consists in its coherence with other beliefs in the system
and given that confabulations can be coherent it follows that
confabulations can meet the coherentist justification condition.
But if confabulations can count as coherentistically justified, then
the epistemic account fails in its attempt to identify the feature
that sets confabulations apart from memories.
Coherentism and reliabilism are not the only accounts of
epistemic justification whereupon confabulations can count
as justified. Other cases in point are the causal theory of
knowledge (Goldman, 1967), the failability account of knowledge
(Hetherington, 2001), deontological conceptions of epistemic
justification (Chisholm, 1977), as well as certain forms of
evidentialism (Conee and Feldman, 2004). Yet discussing these
theories of epistemic justification would take us too far afield.
THE CAUSAL THEORY OF MEMORY
We have seen that there are compelling reasons to reject
the two extant accounts of mnemonic confabulation as “false
memory” and as ill-grounded memory. And since there can
be confabulations that are true and justified it does not help
to define confabulations as memory beliefs that are either false
or ill-grounded24. Where does all this leave us? Are we forced
to conclude that confabulation is “an ill-defined symptom”
(Victor et al., 1989, p. 43) or “merely a polite term for plain
lying” (Whitlock, 1981, p. 213)? No. The point of the paper
is to propose a novel account of confabulation whereupon
the defining characteristic of confabulation vis-à-vis genuine
memory is not that it is false or that it is ill-grounded but that
it lacks the appropriate causal history. In this section I set forth
a version of the causal theory of memory25. In the following
section, I argue that confabulations fail to satisfy the causal
condition on remembering.
Intuitively, to remember something is different both from
learning it anew and from verdically confabulating it. A claim
to remember something implies not merely that the subject
represented it in the past, but that her current representation
is in some way due to, that it comes about because of, her
past representation. A theory of memory must therefore devise
a connection condition that ensures that the memory content
is retained rather than relearned or fabricated. The connection
23For a survey of coherentist theories of memorial justification see Olsson (2017).
24According to Sullivan-Bissett (2015, p. 551), it is a common feature of
confabulatory explanations that they are false or ill-grounded. “Confabulatory
explanations
are
epistemically
faulty.
Generally speaking,
they
are
false
explanations... But even when confabulatory explanations are not false, they are
epistemically poor in other respects. A key epistemic feature of confabulations then
is that they are ill-grounded or poorly supported by evidence.”
25The causal theory of memory sketched in this section is developed in Bernecker
(2010, chs. 4, 5).
condition states that, to remember a proposition, not only must
it have been represented before, but the present representation
must be suitably connected to the past representation.
The connection conditions proposed in the literature fall
into three categories: the evidential retention theory, the simple
retention theory, and the causal theory. The causal theory states
that to remember that p one’s present representation must stand
in an appropriate causal relation to one’s past representation
that p∗, where p is identical with, or sufficiently similar to,
p∗26. The crucial issue is, of course, to determine what should
count as an appropriate causal connection. I will return to
this issue below. The main competitors with the causal theory
are the evidential and the simple retention theory. Proponents
of the simple retention theory such as Squires (1969) hold
that for a past and present representation to be memory-
related, what is required is merely that by virtue of having
had a particular past representation, one acquired an ability or
disposition that one retained and now exercises by occupying
the present representation; there need not be a causal connection
between the past and present representation. According to the
evidential retention theory first proposed by Naylor (1971), for
a piece of knowledge to qualify as a memory its justificatory
factors (evidence, grounds, reasons) must be the same as those
supporting the original piece of knowledge that has been
retained. To remember that p you must know that p, you must
have known that p in the past, and your grounds for believing
p in the past must be the same as your grounds for presently
believing that p. On this view, retaining knowledge involves not
only retaining known propositions but also supporting reasons.
Three reasons speak in favor of the causal theory of memory
and against competing theories. First, the simple retention theory
states that the retention process is not of a causal kind but it
does not give us a lead as to the kind of process responsible for
the retention of the ability to represent a proposition. The causal
theory has an explanatory advantage over the simple theory in
that it gives an answer to the question of what kind of process
makes memory retention possible. Second, unlike the evidential
retention theory, the causal theory is not committed to the
problematic thesis that memory implies epistemic justification
(see Section “Against the Epistemic Theory of Confabulation”).
Third, the causal theory of memory provides a better explanation
of the truth of the commonsensical counterfactual “If S had not
represented at t1 that p∗he wouldn’t represent at t2 that p” than
either the simple or the evidential retention theory.
A more recent rival for the causal theory of memory is (non-
causal) simulationism (Michaelian, 2016b)27. Simulationism
states that is in episodic remembering the subject draws on
information acquired during experience of past events to
construct a simulation of a target event from his personal past.
The proper functioning of the memory system is defined in
26The classic formulation of the causal theory of memory is due to Martin and
Deutscher (1966). Among the critics of the causal theory are Shope (1973) and
Zemach (1983).
27Some versions of simulationism are compatible with the existence of a causal
connection between the past and present representation (DeBrigard, 2014). Here,
I focus on Michaelian’s version of simulationism which purports to do without the
retention condition.
8

Bernecker
terms of three conditions—accuracy, internality, and reliability.
The internality condition states that the remembering subject
must himself contribute either retained or generated content
to the memory representation (Michaelian, 2016b, p. 10). The
reliability condition states that for the memory system to function
properly it must have the tendency to produce mostly accurate
representations. And the combination of the three conditions is
meant to make the causal condition superfluous. As Michaelian
(2016b, p. 7) declares: “Instead of defining the proper functioning
of the system in terms of retention of information, they define it
directly in terms of reliability. ... [O]nce a reliability condition
is added to the theory, the causal condition itself is no longer
necessary.”
In response to the simulationist challenge to the causal
theory of memory I want to make three points. First, insofar
as the content of the memory representation is retained (not
constructed), the question arises as to what is involved in the
process of retaining content. The simulationist theory, like the
simple retention theory, does not provide an answer. I submit
that if proponents of simultanionism tried to spell out the process
underlying the retention of content they would ultimately fall
back on the causal theory of memory. Second, simulationism
defines memory in terms of the reliable production of accurate
representations. But how does our memory system manage to
reliably produce accurate representations? If this question is not
answered in terms of a causal process connecting the past and
present representation, then, as far as I can see, we are left with a
picture whereupon there is a remarkable correlation between our
memory representations and past events but nothing to explain
the correlation. Once again, the causal theory of memory has a
clear explanatory advantage over simulationism in that it explains
the process underlying the remarkable correlation.
Not just any sort of causal connection constitutes memory;
some causal chains are not of the appropriate sort; they are
deviant. But what counts as an appropriate causal connection
between a past and present representation? Intuitively the
past representation must be stored in a memory trace which
represents the original event and provides a causal link between
the original episode and the subject’s ability to remember the
event. When a state of remembering is the joint product of a trace
and a retrieval cue, the trace must be an indispensable part of
the jointly sufficient condition responsible for the production of
the memory. Another way of making the point is to say that the
memory trace must be at least an insufficient but non-redundant
factor of an unnecessary but sufficient condition for the state
of seeming to remember. Mackie (1965) calls such a factor an
inus condition. Characterizing the causal dependence of a state of
remembering on a trace in terms of inus conditions allows us to
distinguish remembering something upon being prompted from
merely repeating back the prompt itself.
There is a crucial difference between the causal dependence
of memories on traces, on the one hand, and the causal
dependence of memories on past representations, on the other.
The dependence of memories on traces vis-à-vis prompts is
best analyzed in terms of necessary and sufficient conditions.
The causal dependence of a memory on the corresponding past
representation is best characterized in terms of a counterfactual
conditional: If S hadn’t represented at t1 that p∗she wouldn’t
represent at t2 that p. This condition allows us to correctly classify
abnormal cases in which a past representation matches a state of
seeming to remember by triggering some one-offrandom causal
mechanism which produces an ostensible memory whose content
has been previously entertained by the subject.
To motivate the counterfactual conditional above consider the
following case. Due to a severe depression, Jane is convinced that
no one likes her. Whenever she meets someone who acts friendly
toward her, the experience gets transformed in her memory, so
that, later on, it seems to her as if the person had acted unfriendly
toward her. Jane is unaware of her memory’s bias. At t1, Jane
has an encounter with Jennifer who openly displays her dislike
for Jane. At t2, Jane seems to remember that Jennifer disliked
her when they met at t1. Even though Jane’s memory claim is
true and there is a causal relation between her experience at t1
and her ostensible memory of that experience at t2 she does not
remember that Jennifer disliked her. The reason Jane doesn’t
remember is that, all things being equal, if, at the time, Jane had
thought that Jennifer likes her, she would still believe at t2 that
Jennifer had acted in an unfriendly manner. It is just a matter
of luck that the content of Jane’s ostensible memory matches
that of her past representation. Yet intuitively, to remember
something, the correspondence between the contents of one’s past
and present representations may not be entirely by accident. For
a state of seeming to remember to be memory-related to a past
representation it has to be the case that, if the past representation
had been different, then one would not occupy the very state of
seeming to remember that one does occupy.
A CAUSAL THEORY OF MNEMONIC
CONFABULATION
The defining characteristic of mnemic confabulation vis-à-vis
genuine memory is that the state of seeming to remember
fails to counterfactually depend on the corresponding past
representation, provided there is a past representation. In some
cases, the confabulatory state purports to represent a particular
past representation but there is no past representation. In
other cases, there is a past representation and confabulation
occurs because the following counterfactual conditional is not
satisfied: if the past representation had been different, it would
have caused a different state of seeming to remember to
match the different past representation. It is the hallmark of
confabulation that any match between the contents of the past
and present representations is nothing but a lucky accident.
In genuine remembering, however, just as the actual past
representation causes a matching state of seeming to remember,
so likewise would alternative past representations. Different past
representations would produce different states of seeming to
remember.
The causal theory of confabulation has been occasionally
mentioned in the literature but it has never been elaborated nor
defended against alternative conceptions. Martin and Deutscher
(1966, p. 173–175) note in their seminal paper “Remembering”
that the causal condition on remembering guards against
9

Bernecker
the possibility of veridical confabulation28. They consider the
following case. Kent experiences a car accident. His memory
of the accident is wiped out by a second car accident that
Kent is involved in shortly after the first accident. At this
point, he no longer remembers the first accident. Again, shortly
afterwards, a hypnotist produces in Kent the belief that he
had been in a car accident at a certain time and place. By
sheer coincidence the hypnotist’s description of the accident
matches Kent’s first accident. After having been hypnotized,
Kent correctly believes that he has been in a car accident of a
certain kind at a certain time and place. Notwithstanding the
fact that Kent is describing correctly the first accident Martin
and Deutscher (1966, p. 174) claim that he does not remember
because “his recounting of the first accident is not due, even in
part, to his observing it.” I agree with Martin and Deutscher’s
treatment of veridical confabulation. But unlike them I employ
the causal condition not only to rule out veridical but not
falsidical confabulation.
Besides Martin and Deutscher, the only other proponent
of a causal theory of confabulation is Robins. In (2017a)
Robins presupposes, but does not develop, a causal theory of
confabulation when she argues that many constructive theories
of memory cannot account for confabulations because they
deny the existence of a causal connection in cases of genuine
remembering and so can’t distinguish real memories from
confabulations where the connection is missing (Robins, 2017a).
The crux with Robin’s account, however, is that it cannot account
for veridical confabulation. For a state as of remembering to
qualify as confabulation, according to Robins, it is not enough
that the causal condition is violated; the content of the state
also needs to be false29. But as we have seen in Section
“Confabulation without Falsehood”, confabulations need not be
false.
The main idea of the causal theory of confabulation is
that a subject is confabulating when her state of seeming to
remember fails to counterfactually depend on the corresponding
past representation, provided there is a past representation.
This definition of confabulation raises the question of whether
it matters by which means the counterfactual dependence is
established30. To illustrate the latter problem, consider a version
of Martin and Deutscher’s car accident example. This time,
however, Kent’s describing correctly the first accident is not
a chance event. Instead the hypnotist would not produce in
Kent the belief that he had been in a car accident at a certain
time and place unless this belief was true. In this case, the
causal dependence clause seems to hold, even though it is
debatable whether it is a case of genuine remembering. The
assessment of this case depends on how wide a range of
possible changes a person’s ostensible memory must depend
on. Borrowing a term from Nozick (1981, p. 178) we can say
that an ostensible memory tracks a past representation when
28This has been noted by Michaelian (2016b, p. 4) and Robins (2016b, p. 2997).
29Robins (2016a, p. 445) writes: “Misremembering occurs when the first retention
condition is met, but the second accuracy condition is not. When neither condition
is met, the result is confabulation.”
30An analogous problem faces Lewis’s (1986) causal theory of hallucination.
a wide range of possible changes of the past representation
brings about corresponding changes of the ostensible memory.
I am inclined to think that deviant causal chains are compatible
with remembering as long as the state of seeming to remember
tracks the corresponding past representation. Yet the plausibility
of the causal theory of confabulation is independent on
where one stands with respect to the issue of deviant causal
chains.
The causal theory of confabulation delivers the right
verdict in the case of veridical and justified confabulation.
For just because a state of seeming to remember is true by
coincidence doesn’t mean that it counterfactually depends on
the corresponding past representation. And likewise whether
a state of seeming to remember is, say, coherentistically
justified has no bearing on whether it counterfactually depends
on the corresponding past representation. That is why the
causal theory of confabulation allows us to eliminate verdicial
and well-grounded confabulations from the ranks of genuine
memory.
CONFABULATING, MISREMEMBERING,
AND RELEARNING
Michaelian (2016b) has recently launched an interesting attack
on the causal theory of confabulation. He grants that the
causal theory of confabulation allows us to distinguish between
remembering and veridical confabulation, on the one hand,
and misremembering and falsidical confabulation, on the
other. What the causal theory of confabulation does not
allow us to do, according to Michaelian, is to differentiate
between confabulation, one the one hand, and relearning and
misremembering, on the other.
Michaelian
treats
relearning,
confabulation,
and
misremembering
as
distinct
kinds
of
“memory
errors.”
Relearning “occurs in certain cases in which the subject’s
memory of an event depends entirely on an external prompt”
(Michaelian, 2016b, p. 3). While relearning is about “lack of
internality,” confabulation is said to be about “lack of reliability”
(see Section “Against the Epistemic Theory of Confabulation”).
Misremembering “occurs when the reliability condition is
met but the accuracy condition is not” (Michaelian, 2016b,
p. 9).
With the distinction between relearning, confabulation and
misremembering in place, Michaelian argues that the causal
theory of confabulation has the consequence of annihilating
the distinction between veridical confabulation and relearning.
The causal approach, he claims, “does not distinguish between
veridical confabulation and relearning, neither of which involves
a trace connection” (Michaelian, 2016b, p. 4–5). Presumably
the idea is that, from the point of view of the causal theory of
memory, there is no difference between a case of relearning where
there are no memory traces whatsoever (lack of internality) and a
case of veridical confabulation where there may be some memory
traces but where they fail to play the appropriate role for the
counterfactual dependence of the ostensible memory state on
the corresponding past representation. And besides conflating
10

Bernecker
veridical confabulation and relearning, the causal theory
also conflates falsidical confabulation and misremembering.
Michaelian writes:
[T]he causalist will ... have difficulty distinguishing between
misremembering and falsidical confabulation. Because he sees
misremembering as being characterized by reliability and
inaccuracy and falsidical confabulation as being characterized by
unreliability and inaccuracy (Michaelian, 2016b, p. 10).
The point of this section is to show that Michaelian’s
objections to the causal theory of confabulation do not hold up
to scrutiny. I will make three points.
First, it is a mistake to include relearning in a taxonomy of
memory errors. Relearning occurs when one learns information,
forgets it, and then re-acquires it either from the same or
a different source (Robins, 2017b, p. 82) The availability of
various sources (diaries, photographs etc.) about some past event,
together with the elusiveness of memory, creates the possibility
that one reacquires, rather than retains, information about the
event.
Relearning is clearly different from remembering, but this
does not mean that relearning is a memory error. Relearning
is typically preceded by forgetting which may or may not be
regarded as a memory error31. And relearning is sometimes
accompanied by a source-monitoring error which is a type of
memory error where the source of a memory is incorrectly
attributed to some specific recollected experience (Johnson et al.,
1993). For instance, you may relearn about a current event
from the local news, forget the event, relearn about the event
from a friend, but later report having learned about it on the
local news (where you originally acquired the information),
thus reflecting an incorrect source attribution. So even though
relearning may be preceded by a memory error (forgetting) and
may be accompanied by a memory error (source-monitoring
error) it is not itself a memory error. Michaelian is aware that
relearning... is not among the memory errors standardly studied
by psychologists. But relearning is clearly closely related to
remembering, and, while it is not natural to view relearning as
an error if the subject is aware that he is relearning, the same
thing goes for the other errors discussed here—in the cases with
which we are concerned, if it is assumed that the subject takes
himself to be remembering. Hence it is appropriate to include it
in a taxonomy of memory errors32.
What Michaelian seems to be saying is that relearning is
a memory error if the subject mistakenly takes himself to
be remembering. But even if we accept this claim, what is
problematic about relearning is the erroneous source monitoring,
not the re-acquisition of information. Any way you look at it,
relearning is not a memory error.
31Michaelian (2011a) argues that a certain pattern of forgetting is necessary if our
memory is to perform its function well.
32Michaelian (2016b, p. 4). Robins (2016a, p. 446, n.17) also classifies relearning as
a memory error.
Second, Michaelian claims that the causal theory conflates
veridical confabulation and relearning since “neither of which
involves a trace connection.” The underlying assumption is that
the causal theory can only distinguish relearning from veridical
confabulation by means of the severed causal connection. And
since the causal connection is severed in either case, there is
nothing to distinguish veridical confabulation and relearning,
or so Michaelian thinks. But this is simply not the case.
There are other ways for the causal theorist to distinguish
veridical confabulation and relearning. For starters, relearning,
unlike confabulation, involves the re-acquisition of information.
Another difference has to do with the attitude of the subject. We
saw that confabulations are taken by the subject to be genuine
memories. Yet in ordinary cases of relearning the subject does
not falsely take himself to be remembering.
Third, Michaelian claims that the causal theory conflates
misremembering and falsidical confabulation since both are
seen “as being characterized by inaccuracy.” Even if we were
to accept Michaelian’s definition of misremembering as reliable
but false33, the criticism does not hold, for there are other
ways for the causal theorist to distinguish misremembering and
falsidical confabulation. As Michaelian himself notes, the causal
theorist can point to the satisfaction of the reliability condition
as a differentia specifica of misremembering vis-à-vis falsidical
confabulation. Furthermore, people who confabulate stories are
often very confident in their “memories” even after being shown
contradicting evidence; this is not usually the case with ordinary
cases of misremembering.
CONSIDERATIONS OF CLINICAL UTILITY
“Confabulation” is neither an ordinary, everyday term (such as
“memory” and “forgetting”), nor a technical philosophical term
(such as “justification” and “knowledge”) but instead a medical
term (such as “brain lesion” and “vitamin B1 deficiency”). Given
that “confabulation” is a medical term, we should expect the
criteria for confabulation to be verifiable in a clinical setting. But
the worry is that the causal theory of confabulation has less strong
ties to clinical practice and to research in cognitive sciences than,
say, the epistemic theory of confabulation. For while it appears to
be possible to verify whether a patient’s memory belief is or isn’t
well-grounded it does not appear to be possible to verify whether
the process that gives rise to a patient’s memory belief satisfies
the counterfactual dependence clause discussed in Section “The
Causal Theory of Memory”; or so a critic might argue. Two points
I think need to be made in response to the concern that the causal
theory of confabulation does not improve diagnosis.
As was explained in Section “Against the Epistemic Theory of
Confabulation”, the epistemic theory of confabulation comes in
two flavors. Michaelian defends an externalist-reliabilist reading
of the epistemic theory while Hirstein’s notion of justification
combines both internalist and externalist elements. Let us start
with Hirstein.
33For an alternative definition of misremembering see Robins position cited in
footnote 29.
11

Bernecker
Hirstein (2005, p. 204) endorses a hybrid theory of justification
that involves both internal and external features. The external
feature of justification consists in the absence of brain damage
and the internal features consists in the coherence among the
subject’s mental states as well as in their likeness to truth.
Hirstein (2005, p. 204) writes: “Confabulators often seem to
believe that their confabulations are justified by other states, by
alleged memories or perceptions, but typically those states are
ill-grounded also.” So, according to Hirstein, it is not enough to
ensure that one’s thoughts are coherent; the thoughts must also
well-grounded in the sense of having a high degree of probability
of truth. Hirstein lists a high degree of probability of truth among
the internal features of justification because he assumes that a
healthy subject has “the ability to assess the probability of a
thought being true” (2005, p. 208).
But how can we tell whether our seeming memory experiences
are indeed representations of the past? An obvious suggestion
is that we can know that our ostensible memories are true by
checking them against diaries, photographs, testimony and the
like. The problem with this kind of evidence, however, is that
it begs the question at issue—whether one’s ostensible memory
supplies knowledge—in that the employment of this evidence
assumes the trustworthiness of some memory (one’s own or
someone else’s). To drive this point home, suppose that you
seem to remember putting a key in the drawer. You open
the drawer, and there is the key. Does this not confirm your
memory experience? No, for the key might be in the drawer
without your having put it there. Then suppose that you try
to confirm your memory experience of having put the key in
the drawer by asking your friend whether she saw you put the
key there. If your friend answers in the affirmative, does this
justify your memory experience? No, for your friend’s (ostensible)
memory experience might be just as much a product of the fancy
as your own. The problem of verifying ostensible memory is
only pushed from you to your friend. The upshot is that any
attempt to confirm the validity of memory experiences is circular.
There is no non-question begging way of determining that one’s
ostensible memories are true. No one memory can be validated
without relying on other memories (cf. Bernecker, 2008, 97–104).
The upshot is that Hirstein’s internalist justification condition
whereupon we need to “assess the probability of a thought being
true” is difficult to use in clinical practice.
Next consider Michaelian’s externalist–reliabilist reading of
the epistemic theory of confabulation. Traditionally knowledge
has been defined as justified true belief. According to reliabilism,
the justification condition should be replaced by the condition
that the true belief was generated by a reliable process. Knowledge
is reliably produced true belief. Michaelian explains that the
notion of reliability underlying his simulationist theory is the
modal notion as opposed to the statistical or probabilistic
notion (Michaelian, 2016b, p. 6; cf. Michaelian, 2016a, p. 140–
142). According to the probabilistic notion, a belief-forming
process is reliable if and only if the conditional probability
to acquire a true belief on the basis of the process is greater
than a certain value. In normal cases of reliable processes,
we can expect the value to be >0.5. According to the modal
notion, a belief-forming process is reliable if and only if in
the actual world and in some suitably qualified possible worlds
the number of true beliefs to the number of false beliefs
resulting from the process is above a certain value. The value
need not be a precise one and might vary with context.
What is important to realize is that the modal notion of
reliability is couched in terms of counterfactuals, i.e., subjunctive
conditional statements whose antecedent states a counter-to-fact
situation.
Given the modal notion of reliability, it doesn’t seem to
be possible to empirically determine whether a given process
is reliable. Devising an experiment to figure out that whether
a subject in a some possible world would acquire more true
than false beliefs on the basis of some process seems to
be just as hopeless as determining whether a subject would
represent at t2 that p even if (counter to fact) she had not
represented at t1 that p∗. Since it doesn’t seem to be possible
to empirically test counterfactuals it is common to think that
they “cannot be relied upon and fruitfully used in empirical-
practical domains such as medicine” (Sadegh-Zadeh, 2015, p.
250). But maybe this is an overhasty conclusion. Reconsider the
counterfactual notion of causation. There is a clear connection
between the notion of counterfactual dependence and the notion
of influence and manipulability: if event x depends on event y,
then x is influenced or manipulated by y34. The manipulability
view of causation is common in the empirical sciences: x
is the cause of y if changing x changes y, i.e., if we can
manipulate y by manipulating x. And given the connection
between counterfactual dependence and manipulability it seems
to be possible to interpret experiments that test for the
presence of influence and manipulability as testing for the
presence of counterfactual dependence (cf. Winship and Morgan,
1999).
We may conclude that considerations of clinical utility
cannot be used to adjudicate between causal and epistemic
accounts of confabulation. The reason is that both Michaelian’s
reliabilist account of confabulation and my own causal account
of confabulation operate with counterfactual conditionals. We
also saw that there may be indirect ways of testing a statement
to the effect that two events are counterfactually dependent on
one another.
CONCLUSION
In sum, what defines confabulations vis-à-vis genuine memories
is not that they are false or lack epistemic justification but that
they fail to be suitably causally connected to the corresponding
past representations, either because there are no corresponding
past representations or because the causal connection has been
severed35.
34Here, I follow Paul (2011, p. 170–171).
35Ancestors of this paper were presented at a conference on Medical Knowledge in
a Social World held at the University of California, Irvine, March 28–29, 2016 and
at the 6th International Conference on Memory held in Budapest, Hungary, July
17–22, 2016. For comments on previous drafts I am grateful to Jordi Fernández,
Kourken Michaelian, Cailin O’Connor, Maura Priest, Sarah K. Robins, Markus
Werning, and three reviewers for this journal.
12

Bernecker
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and
approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This work was supported by an Alexander von Humboldt
Professorship grant.
REFERENCES
Ackil, J. K., and Zaragoza, M. S. (1998). Memorial consequences of forced
confabulation: age differences in susceptibility to false memories. Dev. Psychol.
34, 1358–1372. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.34.6.1358
Adams,
F.
(2011).
Husker
Du?
Philos.
Stud.
153,
81–94.
doi: 10.1007/s11098-010-9663-4
American Psychiatric Association (1994). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 4th Edn. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Anderson, A. R., and Belnap, N. D. (1975). Entailment: The Logic of Relevance and
Necessity, Vol. 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1981). “Memory experience and causation,” in Collected
Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2 Metaphysics and Philosophy of Mind, ed G. E. M.
Anscombe (Oxford: Blackwell), 120–130.
Aristotle (1972). “De Memoria et reminiscentia,” in Aristotle on Memory, ed R.
Sorabji (Providence, RI: Brown University Press), 47–60.
Augustine, S. (1991). Confessions. Edited by H. Chadwick. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ayer, A. J. (1956). The Problem of Knowledge. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Berlyne,
N.
(1972).
Confabulation.
Br.
J.
Psychiatry
120,
31–39.
doi: 10.1192/bjp.120.554.31
Bernecker, S. (2008). The Metaphysics of Memory. Berlin: Springer.
Bernecker, S. (2010). Memory: A Philosophical Study. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Bernecker, S. (2011). Further thoughts on memory: replies to Schechtman, Adams,
and Goldberg. Philos. Stud. 153, 109–121. doi: 10.1007/s11098-010-9638-5
Bernstein, D. M., and Loftus, E. F. (2009). How to tell if a particular
memory
is
true
or
false.
Perspect.
Psychol.
Sci.
4,
370–374.
doi: 10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01140.x
Berrios, G. E. (1998). Confabulations: a conceptual history. J. Hist. Neurosci. 7,
225–241. doi: 10.1076/jhin.7.3.225.1855
Berrios, G. E. (2000). “Confabulations,” in Memory Disorders in Psychiatric
Practice, eds G. E. Berrios, J. R. Hodges (New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press), 348–368.
Bortolotti, L. (2010). Delusions and Other Irrational Beliefs. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bortolotti, L., and Cox, R. E. (2009). ‘Faultless’ ignorance: strengths and limitations
of epistemic definitions of confabulation. Conscious. Cogn. 18, 952–965.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2009.08.011
Carruthers, P. (2005). Consciousness: Essays from a Higher-Order Perspective.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2009). How we know our own mind: the relationship
between mindreading and metacognition. Behav. Brain Sci. 32, 121–182.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X09000545
Ceci, S. (1995). “False belief: some developmental and clinical considerations,” in
Memory Distortions: How Minds, Brains, and Societies Reconstruct the Past, ed
D. L. Schacter (Cambridge/MA: Harvard University Press), 91–125.
Chisholm, R. (1977). Theory of Knowledge, 2nd Edn. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Conee, E., and Feldman, R. (2004). Evidentialism: Essays in Epistemology. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Conway, M. C., and Loveday, C. (2015). Remembering, imagining, false
memories
and
personal
meanings.
Conscious.
Cogn.
33,
574–581.
doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.12.002
Coltheart, M., and Turner, M. (2009). “Confabulation and delusion,” in
Confabulation:
Views
from
Neuroscience,
Psychiatry,
Psychology,
and
Philosophy, ed W. Hirstein (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 173–188.
Dalla
Barba,
G.
(1993).
Confabulation:
knowledge
and
recollective
experience.
Cogn.
Neuropsychol.
10,
1–20.
doi:
10.1080/026432993082
53454
Dalla Barba, G. (2002). Memory, Consciousness and Temporality. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Dalla Barba, G., Cipolotti, L., and Denes, G. (1990). Autobiographical memory loss
and confabulation in korsakoff’s syndrome: a case report. Cortex 26, 525–534.
doi: 10.1016/S0010-9452(13)80302-4
DeBrigard,
F.
(2014).
Is
memory
for
remembering?
Recollection
as
a
form
of
episodic
hypothetical
thinking.
Synthese
191,
155–185.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-013-0247-7
DeLuca, J. (2001). A cognitive neuroscience perspective on confabulation.
Neuropsychoanalysis 2, 119–132. doi: 10.1080/15294145.2000.10773294
Dougherty, T. (2011). “Fallibilism,” in Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, eds S.
Bernecker and D. Pritchard (London: Routledge), 131–143.
Dretske, F. (2000). Entitlement: epistemic rights without epistemic duties? Philos.
Phenomenol. Res. 60, 591–606. doi: 10.2307/2653817
Dretske, F., and Yourgrau, P. (1983). Lost knowledge. J. Philos. 80, 356–367.
doi: 10.2307/2026336
Dub, R. (2017). Delusions, acceptances, and cognitive feelings. Philos. Phenomenl.
Res. 94, 27–60. doi: 10.1111/phpr.12220
Dywan, J. (1995). The illusion of familiarity: an alternative to the report-
criterion account of hypnotic recall. Internat. J. Clin. Exp. Hypn. 43, 194–211.
doi: 10.1080/00207149508409961
Engel, S. (1999). Context is Everything: The Nature of Memory. New York, NY: W.
H. Freeman.
Fotopoulou,
A.
(2008).
False-selves
in
neuropsychological
rehabilitation:
the
challenge
of
confabulation.
Neuropsychol.
Rehabil.
18,
541–565.
doi: 10.1080/09602010802083545
Gilboa, A., Alain, C., Stuss, D. T., Melo, B., Miller, S., and Moscovitch, M. (2006).
Mechanisms of spontaneous confabulations: a strategic retrieval account. Brain
29, 1399–1414. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl093
Goldman, A. I. (1998). “Reliabilism,” in Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed E.
Craig (London: Routledge), 204–208.
Goldman, A. I. (1967). A causal theory of knowing. J. Philos. 64, 357–372.
doi: 10.2307/2024268
Hetherington, S. (2001). Good Knowledge, Bad Knowledge: On Two Dogmas Of
Epistemology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hetherington, S. (2017). Fallibilism. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available
online at: http://www.iep.utm.edu/ (accessed July 5, 2017).
Hirstein, W. (2005). Brain Fiction: Self-Deception and the Riddle of Confabulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hirstein, W. (2009). “The name and nature of confabulation,” in The Routledge
Companion to Philosophy of Psychology, eds J. Symons and P. Calvo (New York,
NY: Taylor & Francis), 647–658.
Hubbard, T. L., Hutchinson, J. L., and Courtney, J. R. (2010). Boundary
extension: findings and theories. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 63, 1467–1494.
doi: 10.1080/17470210903511236
Huemer, M. (1999). The problem of memory knowledge. Pac. Philos. Q. 80,
346–357. doi: 10.1111/1468-0114.00088
Hume, D. (2000). A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by D. F. Norton and M. J.
Norton. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hyman,
I.
E.,
Husband,
T.
H.,
and
Billings,
F.
J.
(1995).
False
memories of childhood experiences. Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 9, 181–197.
doi: 10.1002/acp.2350090302
James, W. (1987). Essays, Comments and Reviews. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., and Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring.
Psychol. Bull. 114, 3–28. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.114.1.3
Johnson, M. K., Hayes, S. M., D’Esposito, M., and Raye, C. L. (2000).
“Confabulation,” in Handbook of Neuropsychology, Vol. 2, Memory and Its
Disorders, 2nd Edn., eds F. Boller, J. Grafman, and L. S. Cermak (Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science), 383–407.
13

Bernecker
Kaplan, D. (1989). “Demonstratives,” in Themes from Kaplan, eds J. Almong, H.
Wettstein, and J. Perry (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), 481–563.
Kellogg, R. (2012). Fundamentals of Cognitive Psychology, 2nd Edn. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lewis, D. (ed.) (1986). “Veridical hallucination and prosthetic vision,” in
Philosophical Papers, Vol. 2, (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 273–286.
Örulv,
L.,
and
Hydén,
L.-C.
(2006).
Confabulation:
sense-making,
self-
making and world-making in dementia. Discourse Stud. 8, 647–673.
doi: 10.1177/1461445606067333
Mackie, J. (1965). Causes and conditions. Am. Philos. Q. 2/4, 245–255.
Martin, C. B., and Deutscher, M. (1966). Remembering. Philos. Rev. 75, 161–196.
doi: 10.2307/2183082
McKay, R., and Kinsbourne, M. (2010). Confabulation, delusion, and anosognosia:
motivational factors and false claims. Cogn. Neuropsychiatry 15, 288–318.
doi: 10.1080/13546800903374871
Michaelian, K. (2011a). The epistemology of forgetting. Erkenntnis 74, 399–424.
doi: 10.1007/s10670-010-9232-4
Michaelian, K. (2011b). Generative memory. Philos. Psychol. 24, 323–342.
doi: 10.1080/09515089.2011.559623
Michaelian, K. (2016a). Mental Time Travel: Episodic Memory and our Knowledge
of the Personal Past. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Michaelian,
K.
(2016b).
Confabulating,
misremembering,
relearning:
the
simulation theory of memory and unsuccessful remembering. Front. Psychol.
7:1857. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01857
Moon, A. (2013). Remembering entails knowing. Synthese 190, 2717–2729.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-012-0065-3
Moscovitch, M. (1995). “Confabulation,” in Memory Distortion. How Minds,
Brains, and Societies Reconstruct the Past, ed D. L. Schacter (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press), 226–251.
Moscovitch, M. (1989). “Confabulation and the frontal lobe system,” in Varieties
of Memory and Consciousness: Essays in Honor of Endel Tulving, eds. H. L.
Roediger and F. I. Craik (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum), 133–160.
Naylor, A. (1971). B remembers that P from time, T. J. Philos. 68, 29–41.
doi: 10.2307/2025220
Newby, I. R., and Ross, M. (1996). Beyond the correspondence metaphor:
when
accuracy
cannot
be
assessed.
Behav.
Brain
Sci.
19,
205–206.
doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00042321
Nisbett,
R.,
and
Wilson,
T.
D.
(1977).
Telling
more
than
we
can
know: verbal reports on mental processes. Psychol. Rev. 84, 231–259.
doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.84.3.231
Nozick, R. (1981). Philosophical Explanation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Olsson, E. J. (2017). “Coherentism,” in Routledge Handbook of the Philosophy of
Memory, eds S. Bernecker and K. Michaelian (New York, NY: Routledge),
310–322.
Paul, L. A. (2011). “Counterfactual theories,” in The Oxford Handbook on
Causation, eds H. Beebee, C. Hitchcock, and P. Menzies (Oxford: Oxford
University Press), 158–184.
Perring, C. (2010). Mental Illness. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available
online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-illness/
Plato (1921). Theaetetus. Transl. by H. N. Fowler. Loeb Classical Library. London:
William Heineman.
Pollock, J. L., and Cruz, J. (1999). Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, 2nd Edn.
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Rahmanovic, A., Barnier, A. J., Cox, R. E., Langdon, R. A., and Coltheart, M.
(2012). That’s not my arm: a hypnotic analogue of somatoparaphrenia.
Cogn.
Neuropsychiatry
17,
36–63.
doi:
10.1080/13546805.2011.5
64925
Ramachandran, V. S. (1995). Anosognosia in parietal lobe syndrome. Conscious.
Cogn. 4, 22–51. doi: 10.1006/ccog.1995.1002
Robins,
S.
K.
(2016a).
Misremembering.
Philos.
Psychol.
29,
432–447.
doi: 10.1080/09515089.2015.1113245
Robins, S. K. (2016b). Representing the past: memory traces and the causal theory
of memory. Philos. Stud. 173, 2993–3013. doi: 10.1007/s11098-016-0647-x
Robins, S. K. (2017a). Confabulation and constructive memory. Synthese.
doi: 10.1007/s11229-017-1315-1. [Epub ahead of print].
Robins, S. K. (2017b). “Memory traces,” Routledge Handbook of the Philosophy
of Memory, eds S. Bernecker and K. Michaelian (New York, NY: Routledge),
76–87.
Sadegh-Zadeh, K. (2015). Handbook of Analytic Philosophy of Medicine, 2nd Edn.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Sadler, J. Z., Wiggins, O. P., and Schwartz, M. A. (1994). Philosophical Perspectives
on Psychiatric Classification. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Schacter, D. L. (2001). The Seven Sins of Memory. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Schnider, A. (2008). The Confabulating Mind: How the Brain Creates Reality.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shema, R., Sacktor, T. C., and Dudai, Y. (2007). Rapid erasure of long-term
memory associations in the cortex by an inhibitor of PKMζ. Science 317,
951–953. doi: 10.1126/science.1144334
Shoemaker, S. (ed.) (2003). “Persons and their pasts,” in Identity, Cause, and Mind
(Oxford: Clarendon), 19–48.
Shope, R. (1973). Remembering, knowledge, and memory traces. Philos.
Phenomenol. Res. 33, 303–322. doi: 10.2307/2106945
Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (1984). Ought Conversationally implies can. Philos. Rev.
93, 249–261. doi: 10.2307/2184585
Squires,
R.
(1969).
Memory
unchained.
Philos.
Rev.
78,
178–196.
doi: 10.2307/2184180
Sullivan-Bissett, E. (2015). Implicit bias, confabulation, and epistemic innocence.
Conscious. Cogn. 33, 548–560. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2014.10.006
Sutton, J. (2003). “Truth in memory: the humanities and the cognitive sciences,”
in Proof and Truth: The Humanist as Expert, eds I. McCalman and A.
McGrath (Canberra, ACT: The Australian Academy of the Humanities),
145–163.
Talland, G. A. (1965). Deranged Memory. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Turnbull, O., Jenkins, S., and Rowley, M. (2004). The pleasantness of false
beliefs: an emotion-based account of confabulation. Neuro Psychoanal. 6, 5–45.
doi: 10.1080/15294145.2004.10773432
Van Damme, I., and d’Ydewalle, G. (2010). Confabulation versus experimentally
induced false memories in korsakoffpatients. J. Neuropsychol. 4, 211–230.
doi: 10.1348/174866409X478231
Victor, M., Adams, R. D., and Collins, G. H. (1989). The Wernicke-Korsakoff
Syndrome, 2nd Edn. Philadelphia, PA: F.A. Davis.
Wheatley, T. (2009). “Everyday confabulation,” in Confabulation: Views from
Neuroscience, Psychiatry, Psychology, and Philosophy, ed W. Hirstein (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), 203–222.
Whitlock, F. (1981). Some observations on the meaning of confabulation. Br. J.
Med. Psychol. 54, 213–218. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8341.1981.tb01451.x
Williamson, T. (2000). Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Winship,
C.,
and
Morgan,
S.
L.
(1999).
The
estimation
of
causal
effects
from
observational
data.
Annu.
Rev.
Sociol.
25,
659–707.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.soc.25.1.659
Zemach, E. M. (1983). Memory: what it is, and what it cannot possibly be. Philos.
Phenomenol. Res. 46, 31–44. doi: 10.2307/2107578
Conflict of Interest Statement: The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Bernecker. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
14