WHATEVER GAVE YOU THAT IDEA? FALSE MEMORIES FOLLOWING EQUIVALENCE
TRAINING: A BEHAVIORAL ACCOUNT OF THE MISINFORMATION EFFECT
DANNA M. CHALLIES1, MAREE HUNT2, MARYANNE GARRY 2, AND DAVID N. HARPER2
1CENTRE FOR DEFENCE AND SECURITY STUDIES, MASSEY UNIVERSITY
2VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OF WELLINGTON
The misinformation effect is a term used in the cognitive psychological literature to describe both
experimental and real-world instances in which misleading information is incorporated into an account
of an historical event. In many real-world situations, it is not possible to identify a distinct source of
misinformation, and it appears that the witness may have inferred a false memory by integrating
information from a variety of sources. In a stimulus equivalence task, a small number of trained
relations between some members of a class of arbitrary stimuli result in a large number of untrained, or
emergent relations, between all members of the class. Misleading information was introduced into a
simple memory task between a learning phase and a recognition test by means of a match-to-sample
stimulus equivalence task that included both stimuli from the original learning task and novel stimuli.
At the recognition test, participants given equivalence training were more likely to misidentify patterns
than those who were not given such training. The misinformation effect was distinct from the effects of
prior stimulus exposure, or partial stimulus control. In summary, stimulus equivalence processes may
underlie some real-world manifestations of the misinformation effect.
Key words: stimulus equivalence, derived relations, false memory, memory, misinformation effect,
match to sample, humans
_______________________________________________________________________________
Memory errors have been the subject of
considerable research in the cognitive litera-
ture over the last 40 years. This research has
focused on both basic (e.g., examination of
normal memory processes) and applied (e.g.,
inaccuracy
of
eye-witness
memory)
topics.
Recently, there have been a number of studies
that
have
tried
to
investigate
traditional
cognitive-psychological phenomena in terms
of behavior-analytic processes (Guinther &
Dougher, 2010; Harper & Garry, 2000; Meeter,
Shohamy, & Myers, 2009).
One potential behavioral analog of process-
es studied in the cognitive literature that are
thought to contribute to memory errors may
be the development of emergent relations
among stimuli such as those participating in
an equivalence class. Typically, a stimulus may
gain a function either by correlation tempo-
rally and spatially with another stimulus which
has that function (Rehfeldt & Hayes, 1998), or
by stimulus generalization based on some
physical property shared by the two stimuli.
An abstract stimulus may also acquire the
function of a second stimulus through a
common relationship with a mediating stimu-
lus even though they may not have been
temporally
or
spatially
correlated.
Stimuli
which share a common function participate
in a functional equivalence class; further,
stimuli which are substitutable within a spec-
ified context participate in a stimulus equiva-
lence class (Dougher, 1998; Sidman, 1994).
Sidman (1994) demonstrated stimulus equiv-
alence using match-to-sample (MTS) training,
and he proposed that stimulus equivalence
was an operant behavior, and that stimulus
equivalence classes could be defined using the
terms reflexivity, or identity matching, symmetry,
and transitivity from mathematical set theory,
although the analogy is not perfect (see
Tonneau, 2001). Symmetry occurs when after
training a person to select stimulus B in the
presence of stimulus A (denoted as AB), the
person will select stimulus A in the presence
of B (denoted as BA) without further training.
Transitivity occurs when after the relations AB
and BC are trained, the AC relation emerges.
New items added to a stimulus equivalence
class need only be related to one other
existing item of the class (e.g., CD) in order
for emergent symmetry, transitivity and re-
flexivity to be observed between the added
The study described in this paper was developed from
studies conducted for Danna Challies’ Ph.D. thesis. We
would like to thank two anonymous reviewers for their
insightful comments and suggestions on an earlier version
of this manuscript.
Correspondence should be addressed to Maree Hunt,
School of Psychology, P.O. Box 600, Wellington 6140, New
Zealand (e-mail: maree.hunt@vuw.ac.nz).
doi: 10.1901/jeab.2011.96-343
JOURNAL OF THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF BEHAVIOR
2011, 96, 343–362
NUMBER 3 (NOVEMBER)
343

stimulus (D) and the remaining class mem-
bers (A, B and C).
Some authors refer to combined symmetry
and transitivity (i.e, CA), as equivalence (Wirth
& Chase, 2002; Yamamoto & Asano, 1995).
The important feature is that the emergent
relationships are not specifically trained. Sid-
man (1994; Sidman & Tailby, 1982) suggested
that equivalence may underlie symbolic behav-
ior and referential meaning and that tests for
equivalence are also tests of semantic relations.
A further property of a stimulus equivalence
class is the potential for the transfer of
functions between equivalent stimuli. If a
function is trained to one member of a
stimulus equivalence class, without further
training, other members of the equivalence
class will evoke the same function (Dougher,
1998; Dougher & Markham, 1996). Both the
establishment of stimulus classes and the
transfer of function between class members
are probably heavily influenced by contextual
features (Dougher, Perkins, Greenway, Koons,
& Chiasson, 2002; Meehan & Fields, 1995;
Randell & Remington, 2006; Rehfeldt, 2003).
Guinther and Dougher (2010) investigated
whether such derived relations could be seen
as analogous to semantics (meaning) in the
cognitive literature and thus have similar
effects on memory. In the classic cognitive-
psychological Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM)
procedure (Roediger & McDermott, 1995),
participants
are
asked
to
study
lists
of
semantically related words (e.g. words with
related meaning such as ‘‘pillow’’, ‘‘bed’’,
‘‘rest’’). Then, participants are given a test in
which they are asked to recall the list words;
often,
they
falsely
recall
words
that
are
semantically related to the studied word list
(e.g., ‘‘sleep’’) and the likelihood of a false
recall is correlated with increased semantic
relatedness. This phenomenon is not restrict-
ed to verbal stimuli: Participants who view a
sequence of images consistent with a familiar
script (e.g., making a sandwich) are more
likely to falsely recognize images which were
not included in the original to-be-memorized
set, but which are consistent with the script
(Gerrie, Belcher, & Garry, 2006; Hannigan
&Tippens Reinitz, 2001; Jenkins, Wald, &
Pittenger, 1986).
In their DRIFT (derived relational intru-
sions following training) procedure, Guinther
and Dougher (2010) created an analogue of
semantic relatedness by using match-to-sample
training to establish equivalence classes be-
tween groups of randomly selected words. In
addition, Guinther and Dougher ensured that
each of the targeted words in a critical set was
also correlated temporally and spatially with a
distracter word from another set. Thus, each
of
the
target
words
was
related
through
equivalence (hypothetically analogous to se-
mantic relations) to one nontarget word, and
each target word was associatively related to a
second nontarget word through temporal and
spatial contiguity in the absence of reinforce-
ment. Participants were then requested to
memorize 12 of the 24 original target words,
followed by recall and recognition tests. In the
recognition test, both target and nontarget
words were presented. Participants were sig-
nificantly more likely to recall incorrectly or
recognize nontarget words related to target
words through derived relations than they
were to recall incorrectly or recognize nontar-
get words related through temporal/spatial
correlation or unrelated words presented as
distracters during the training procedure.
Guinther and Dougher (2010) argued that
having established stimulus equivalence by
training the relation ‘‘MEANS THE SAME
THING,’’ when they then trained a new
function, ‘‘REMEMBER THIS,’’ to half of the
target stimuli, functional transfer resulted in
other stimuli in the equivalence set also
entering into the ‘‘REMEMBER THIS’’ rela-
tion. Memory intrusions were thus a natural
result of this transfer of function between
stimuli. This transfer of function was more
important in determining intrusions than was
spatial and temporal association. The present
study joins this emerging field of behavioral
research
by
investigating
whether
derived
relations might also contribute to a related
false-memory phenomenon, the misinforma-
tion effect.
The Misinformation Effect in ihe
Cognitive Literature
The phenomenon of changes to reported
memory as a result of subsequent misinforma-
tion, termed the misinformation effect, has been
well
demonstrated.
Since
the
mid-70s,
a
plethora of research has demonstrated that
postevent misinformation may change report-
ed details of an event that an individual has
witnessed or even cause individuals to report
344

people or objects that were never experienced
(e.g. Allen
&
Lindsay,
1998;
Belli, 1989;
Chandler, Gargano, & Holt, 2001; Henkel,
Franklin, & Johnson, 2000; Lindsay, 1990;
Lindsay, Allen, Chan, & Dahl, 2004; Lindsay,
Hagen, Wade, & Garry, 2004; Loftus, 1975,
1979; Loftus & Hoffman, 1989; Loftus, Miller,
& Burns, 1978; Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Lyle &
Johnson, 2006; Marche, Brainerd, & Reyna,
2010; Mitchell & Zaragoza, 1996, 2001; Okado
& Stark, 2005; Skagerberg & Wright, 2008;
Stark, Okado, & Loftus, 2010; Sutherland &
Hayne, 2001; Wright & Loftus, 1998; Wright,
Self, & Justice, 2000).
The
paradigmatic
misinformation
study
(Loftus et al., 1978) consists of three phases
(see top panel of Figure 1). In the first phase,
an eyewitness is exposed to an event. In the
second phase, information that contradicts
factual detail of the observed event is then
given to the eyewitness. This information is
often in the form of questions ostensibly about
some other facet of the event (e.g. Sutherland
& Hayne, 2001), or a narrative purporting to
summarize the event (e.g. Searcy, Bartlett, &
Memon, 2000). In the third phase, when the
eyewitnesses are asked to recall or recognize
the original event, their reports often integrate
the misinformation to which they have been
exposed.
Indirect Misinformation
While the Loftus et al. (1978) procedure
may reliably produce inaccurate performance
on recall and recognition tests, it is not clear
that it captures what happens in many real-
world cases. In many real-world occasions
where a witness has incorporated misinforma-
tion into his or her testimony, there is no
indication that the witness was misled by
information provided after the event (Gross,
Jacoby,
Matheson,
Montgomery,
&
Patil,
2005). It is, however, possible that information
has been inferred, or acquired indirectly, from
a variety of sources rather than explicitly
provided. This indirect information may be
incorporated into the witness’s report of the
event. Studies of the effects of postevent
misinformation generally focus on providing
misinformation that specifically contradicts
Fig. 1.
Overview of the procedure. The rows compare two types of cognitive psychological misinformation studies,
typically in three phases, and the present behavioral study. The left column shows the target event or stimulus to be
remembered, the second column shows the source of misinformation, and the right column shows the event or stimulus
that is erroneously recognized as the target.
345

details of the original event. However, a few
studies have shown that participants’ reports
may also be influenced by indirect or inferred
misinformation (Loftus, 1975; Loftus & Palmer,
1974), described by the researchers as ‘‘presup-
position.’’ For example, Loftus and Palmer
provided
subjects
with
misinformation
by
manipulating the verbs used to describe an
accident between two vehicles. Verbs presup-
posing a more violent accident resulted in
eyewitnesses more likely to report having seen
broken glass, even though the original film of
the accident did not show any broken glass.
A related study (Loftus & Zanni, 1975)
asked one question presupposing the exis-
tence of a target object, ‘‘Did you see the
broken headlight?’’ These participants were
more likely to falsely report having seen a
broken headlight than participants exposed
to a nonpresumptive question, ‘‘Did you see a
broken headlight?’’ It may be argued that
these presupposition variations of the misin-
formation paradigm insert a false element into
an original memory by presenting a semantic
equivalent to the participants. The question,
‘‘Did you see the broken headlight?’’ carries
with it the semantic construal ‘‘there was a
broken headlight present during the original
event.’’ The false element is incorporated into
the participant’s account of the event through
semantic relations.
Source Monitoring
One cognitive account of the misinformation
effect is that memory errors are due to source
monitoring errors (Lindsay, 1990; Lindsay, Allen,
et al., 2004; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000). As new
information is encountered, it is integrated into
a person’s knowledge of an original event via
semantic relations. In this account, if the
semantic relations between new and existing
information are strong, and the association
between new information and its source is
weak, the new information (misinformation) is
ascribed to the same source as the original
event.
From a behavioral perspective, stimulus
equivalence can account for the misinforma-
tion
effect.
First,
equivalence
provides
a
vehicle by which a new function or response
may join a preexisting behavioral repertoire
without explicit training or direct contact
between all elements. Second, consideration
of the interplay between context and class
accounts for the effects of source monitoring.
Equivalence
classes
are
contextually
con-
trolled; without it, equivalence class expansion
would rapidly render all stimuli part of a single
class. It is possible that in the real-world,
equivalence class members themselves would
form a part of the context which controls
responding to their class.
In some instances, the addition of new
stimulus-class
members
may
be
context-
dependent such that two overlapping stimulus
classes are created. In other words, given the
original context, the original class may be
retained, and given a new context, the class is
composed of the original stimuli and the new
stimuli. A situation in which the two contexts
are not readily discriminable may be analo-
gous to the notion of a source-monitoring
error.
If derived relations are a behavioral ana-
logue of semantic relatedness (as suggested
by Guinther & Dougher, 2010), it should be
possible to replicate the misinformation effect
in behavior analytic research using the equiv-
alence paradigm. This idea is consistent with
Guinther and Dougher’s results, but there are
also some aspects of the misinformation effect
that need further consideration to confirm the
potential role of emergent relations in this
type of recognition error. The present study
investigated whether recognition errors could
be indirectly produced by substituting compo-
nent stimuli of an originally learned com-
pound stimulus (target pattern) with novel
component stimuli that had been linked to the
original
component
stimuli
of
the
target
pattern in the relation ‘‘BELONGS WITH’’
via MTS training (see Figure 1).
In Phase 1 of the current procedure, the to-
be-remembered objects were presented to-
gether as spatial arrays or compound stimuli
(the target patterns). In Phase 2, for partici-
pants in the experimental group, MTS training
was used to establish stimulus equivalence and
the relation ‘‘BELONGS WITH’’ among the
members of the training sets and including
one new object (for each set) not presented in
Phase 1. In Phase 3, participants were given a
recognition test in which stimulus patterns
were: (1) those trained in Phase 1 (i.e., targets
in the cognitive literature); (2) made up of
objects from Phases 1 and 2 (i.e., lures in the
cognitive literature); and (3) made up of novel
objects (i.e., foils in the cognitive literature).
346

In line with the cognitive literature on the
misinformation effect, it was expected that
participants who passed equivalence tests in
Phase 2 would respond to both the target and
lure patterns, but not the foil patterns. By
contrast, participants in the control group
were
expected
to
respond
to
the
target
patterns, but not the lure or foil patterns.
Through this research, we are proposing a
potential behavioral account for some instances
of the misinformation effect. That is, we
propose emergent relations as a mechanism
whereby a false element may come to be
reported as an integral part of an original event.
METHOD
Participants
Fifty-one introductory psychology students
participated. The only exclusion criterion was
color-blindness.
Participants
earned
credits
towards the research component of the course.
Twenty-four participants were randomly as-
signed to a control group and 27 to an experi-
mental group. Of this group, 3 were removed
from the final analysis: 1 did not show for the
second session, and 2 failed to complete the
MTS task within the time allotted.
Apparatus
The stimuli were presented on a computer
monitor by means of a Macromedia Author-
ware 6 interactive training program.
The
program display was 22 cm wide by 15 cm
high on a 35-cm VGA monitor. Participants
were seated 30-70
cm
from the monitor
(primarily
dependent
on
personal
prefer-
ence). Participants responded to sample stim-
uli by using a mouse to move the on-screen
cursor either to the stimuli or to a virtual
button and clicking the left button on the
mouse. Participant responses and the time
spent
on
the
task
(exclusive
of
reading
instruction screens) were recorded and saved
to a text document at the completion of each
phase of the study.
The stimuli were colored shapes and three
letters. Nine of the colored shapes were
arranged into three target patterns and were
used in Phase 1. Each pattern consisted of a
large colored shape, with two smaller colored
shapes located within the contour of the larger
shape as shown in the top row of Figure 2.
Fifteen colored shapes were arranged into five
distractor patterns for use in the test compo-
nent of the phase.
For Phase 2, the three letters, A, B, and C
were presented in Comic Sans MS font 35 mm
high, and nine colored shapes were arranged
into three 4-member classes as shown in
Figure 3. Note two colored shapes in each
class were identical to two components of a
target pattern used in Phase 1. A third shape in
each set (B1, B2, or B3) was the same shape as
the remaining component (one of the smaller,
internal, colored shapes) of the target pattern,
but was a different color.
In Phase 3, there were three types of
stimulus patterns: (1) the same three target
patterns from Phase 1; (2) three lure patterns
each composed of the colored-shape stimuli
from one of the equivalence classes trained in
Phase 2 (see second row of Figure 2); and (3)
six foil patterns made up of a mixture of both
previously seen and novel color/shape combi-
nations (see third row of Figure 2).
Procedure
The experiment was conducted in three
phases over two sessions held on the same day
(see Figure 1); the first session ran for a total
of 30 min including the time taken to give
instructions, while the second session ran for a
total of 60 min including instructions and
debriefing times. There was a delay of 90 min
between sessions. During Session 1, partici-
pants carried out a learning task. During
Session 2, participants completed a stimulus
equivalence
task
(experimental
group) or
vigilance task (control group), followed by a
recognition test of patterns learned during the
first session.
Participant preparation. To be consistent with
the standard misinformation studies, partici-
pants were misled as to the purpose of the
experiment. At the start of the first session,
participants were informed that they were
participating in an experiment comparing
‘‘long-term memory’’ with ‘‘working memory’’
for similar stimuli. The memorization task and
the recognition test were ostensibly the long-
term memory task, while the stimulus equiva-
lence training (or vigilance task for the control
group) was described as a test of working
memory. The instructions for all participants
at the start of the first session were:
347

‘‘Today we are comparing long-term memory
with working memory, to investigate whether
people who are better at retaining a mental
representation of an image over a period of
time are also better at continually updating
their memory during a learning task. This is
the first session of the long-term memory task
where you will learn three patterns made up of
Fig. 2.
First line shows target stimuli for the memory task; actual height of each pattern onscreen was between 8 and
9 cm high (depending on pattern). Lure patterns are on line 2, and foils are on lines 3 and 4. Color codes are below the
stimuli. All stimuli were used in the recognition test. Stimuli were presented individually and in random order.
348

coloured shapes. The computer will take you
through a training program and test you at the
end to ensure you have memorised the
patterns. If you do not pass the test, the
program will return you to the start of the
training segment to repeat the training. You
need to have memorised the patterns by the
end of this session in order to qualify to come
back for the second session. At the end of the
second session, you will be tested on your
memory for the patterns, after the working
memory test.
Pay attention to both the colours and shapes in
each pattern; there may be up to three
different shapes of each colour, or three
different colours that have the same shape, in
different patterns.’’
Feedback at the conclusion of the study
confirmed that the deception was successful.
Participants were also advised that they were
free to withdraw from the study at any time
and completed written consent forms before
starting Phase 1.
Phase 1—Learning Task
For the initial learning task, participants
were exposed to, and interacted with three
patterns each composed of three colored
shapes (see Figure 2, top row). The task
consisted of four components: (1) passive
exposure; (2) a constructed response task;
(3) self-paced exposure; and (4) an exit test.
For
the
initial
passive
exposure
phase,
participants were exposed to each pattern for
4 s four times sequentially. Above each pattern
was the sentence ‘‘Study the pattern careful-
ly,’’ and below each pattern was the label
‘‘Pattern X’’ where X refers to the number 1, 2
or 3.
In some cognitive studies of the misinfor-
mation effect, false recall and recognition
responses have been demonstrated by both
‘‘misinformation
interference’’—where
pre-
sentation of a novel stimulus prevented re-
porting of an original stimulus—and also
‘‘misinformation
acceptance’’—where
the
false recall/recognition response was due to
the participants either forgetting some, or not
attending to all, of the stimuli presented at the
original event (Belli, 1989). For the present
research, it was important to reduce the
likelihood of the latter in order to ensure the
observed effects were consequent to derived
relations. This required a training program
which ensured that participants attended to all
aspects of the patterns, rather than having
responses come under control of one or a few
dimensions
of
the
target
pattern
(partial
stimulus control).
Constructed response tasks have been found
to
improve
literacy
skills
by
requiring
a
participant to attend to all components of
the stimulus (e.g. De Rose, De Souza, &
Hanna, 1996; Dube, McDonald, McIlvane, &
MacKay, 1991). This technique was used here
to similarly ensure participants attended to all
aspects of the pattern. For this training task,
participants received the on-screen instruction
‘‘please construct Pattern ‘X’ if all of its objects
are here.’’ They were then required to select
(with a mouse click) and drag the two small
A
B
C
Fig. 3.
Sets used for the stimulus equivalence task. Actual height of each object on screen was 3.5 to 4 cm high
(depending on object).
349

components of each pattern, from an array of
colored shapes, on to the larger background
shape. The array consisted of seven stimuli
that differed in shape and color. If the
participants selected an incorrect colored or
shaped stimulus, the stimulus immediately
returned to its starting position in the array.
If they attempted to place the correct colored
shape into the wrong position (left or right of
the central axis) the object snapped into the
correct position. The participants repeated the
process of selecting stimuli from the array
until they had placed the two correct internal
colored shapes within the contour of the
background shape (except for the two trials
noted below). At that point, a button labeled
‘‘Continue’’ appeared, and clicking on it
advanced the program to the next trial. There
were a total of six constructed response trials,
two for each pattern. For each of these trials,
the stimuli available in the array included two
stimuli, each the correct shape and color of
one of the component stimuli of the pattern.
The remaining stimuli varied across trials but
included at least one stimulus that was the
same color or shape as the correct stimulus
and two other stimuli that were either the
same color as each other but not the color of
the correct stimulus or the same shape as each
other
but
not
the
shape
of
the
correct
stimulus. The incorrect stimuli included in
the array were different for the two trials for
each pattern. In this way it was necessary for
the participant to attend to both color and
shape to complete the task accurately. There
were two additional trials that did not include
all of the correct components for a target
pattern within the array. For these trials the
correct response was to click a virtual button
stating, ‘‘Pattern X cannot be constructed.’’
This button was present for all constructed
response trials, but responses to this button
were ineffective when all components were
available.
Following the constructed response task,
participants were allowed to view each of the
patterns for as long as they liked before
completing a test. A total of eight trials were
presented in the test, three patterns were the
target patterns, and five patterns were distrac-
ters similar to (but not the same as) those
shown in Figure 2. On each trial, one pattern
was presented with two response buttons
positioned directly below it. One button was
labeled ‘‘old’’ and the other was labeled
‘‘new.’’ Participants were asked to select the
‘‘old’’ button if the pattern was one of the
three training patterns and the ‘‘new’’ button
if the pattern was not previously seen. Partic-
ipants
who
failed
to
correctly
classify
all
patterns returned to the start to re-run the
entire learning program. The criterion for
continued participation in the study was to
accurately classify all patterns within the 30 min
allotted for the first session (all participants
eventually passed the memory test).
Phase 2—Stimulus Equivalence Task
(Experimental Group)
Baseline
training.
Sidman’s
(Sidman
&
Tailby, 1982) match-to-sample (MTS) method
was used to train three 4-member stimulus
equivalence classes. Earlier work (Challies,
2005) had shown that participants had diffi-
culty learning this type of task. To facilitate
acquisition of the training relations and the
emergence of equivalence, this experiment
incorporated exclusion techniques for train-
ing novel stimuli (exclusion is frequently used
to facilitate rapid and accurate learning in
typically
developing
and
developmentally-
delayed children). The first two stimuli in
each set were presented twice for 5 s each as
paired associates prior to the first MTS train-
ing trials, and subsequent trials introducing
new
class
members
used
familiar
stimuli
belonging to another class as the other two
comparison stimuli. This allowed the partici-
pant to exclude the familiar distracters and
correctly select the new class member (see
Ferrari, de Rose, & McIlvane, 1993; Ferrari, De
Rose, & McIlvane, 2008).
Additionally, Arntzen (2004) found that
using
a
picture
rather
than
an
abstract
stimulus as the first stimulus in a set facilitated
the emergence of equivalence, presumably
due either to familiarity with the stimuli or
naming the stimuli (Horne & Lowe, 1996). For
this reason, one stimulus in each set was a
letter (A stimuli in Figure 3) and the remain-
ing stimuli were the three colored shapes (B,
C, and D stimuli in Figure 3). The letter
stimulus was also meant to reduce the possi-
bility that participants would find similarities
between the ‘‘long-term memory’’ task pat-
terns, and the ‘‘working-memory’’ task sets,
and contribute to contextual confusion at the
final recognition test through its absence (see
350

discussion). The stimuli designated as B in
Figure 3 were novel to this phase of the
experiment. Because initial Phase 2 training
involved the A and B stimuli, the participants
had a period of training with novel stimuli
before previously encountered stimuli were
introduced as the C and D stimuli. Finally, the
colored shape which formed the background
contour of the target pattern in Phase 1 was
judged to be the most discriminable target-
pattern component both because it was the
largest and formed the outline contour, and
was
always
introduced
last
(D
stimuli
in
Figure 3).
At the start of this session, participants in
the experimental group were told in both oral
and written on-screen instructions that both
the ‘‘long-term memory’’ and the ‘‘working
memory’’
tests
would
use
similar
stimuli,
supposedly
to
reduce
confounds
due
to
differing levels of familiarity with different
types of stimuli. The instructions were:
‘‘You will be working on two different com-
puter programs in this session. The first
program is the working memory test. You will
be learning three sets of objects at the same
time. Each set contains one letter, and three
coloured objects [researcher draws a sample
set ‘E’ on the white board with coloured
markers]. Because we are comparing two
different types of memory, we need to make
sure that the objects we use in the two tests are
reasonably similar to each other. This is because
if we used totally dissimilar objects, we could
introduce a ‘confound’ into our study—that
is—we would not know whether any difference
in performance was due to the different
memory task, or because we used different
types of objects in the different tasks.
Pay attention to both the colour and the shape
of each object; both colour and shape may
repeat in different combinations.
If you focus on just the colour or the shape you
are likely to get confused later on in the working
memory task. If you make a mistake during
some trials, the program gives you a short
period of retraining—you do not go back to the
start every time you make a mistake.
When you have finished the working memory
task, let me know and I will start the long-term
memory test for you. After you have finished
that, I have a short feed-back form for you to fill
out, then a quick debrief and you are free to go.’’
Table 1 provides an overview of the training
and testing sequence. Stimulus equivalence
classes were trained in 10 blocks designated
Block 0 to Block 9. During Block 0, the initial
stimulus pairs (A1, B1; A2, B2; A3, B3) in each
class were established by means of contiguity,
before beginning the match-to-sample proce-
dure. Blocks 1 to 8 were match-to-sample trials;
the sample stimulus was located in the upper
half of the display panel, while three compar-
ison stimuli (an S+ and two S2) were arranged
horizontally on the lower half of the display
panel. Onscreen instructions stated: ‘‘Please
select the object that belongs to this set.’’
During training blocks, the position of the S+
(left, center, or right) alternated randomly,
without replacement, until each S+ had been
presented in each location. Each block trained
one relation (e.g. A1–B1, A2–B2, and A3–B3), so
a complete training block consisted of nine
trials—the target relation for each set presented
three times with the S+ in a different position
each time. If any participants made an error
during a training block, they repeated that
training block until they met the 100% accuracy
criterion across the nine trials comprising
that block. Audible feedback indicated correct
responses with a high pitched ‘‘ding’’ and
incorrect responses with a low pitched ‘‘buzz.’’
For blocks testing symmetry or transitivity,
the S+ for the relation being tested was
presented once only for each set, in a position
(left, center, or right) selected at random.
There was no feedback supplied during testing
blocks. After all test relations were presented,
the participants either progressed to the next
block of the program (if they had correctly
selected all S+), or repeated earlier training
blocks (if they had not identified all S+).
Criterion for progression for all blocks was
100%.
Stimulus equivalence classes were consid-
ered established on successful completion of
the stimulus equivalence MTS task. The final
confirmatory test of class membership was also
a MTS exercise; however, the sample stimulus
was set in the centre of the screen, while nine
comparison stimuli were arranged in a ‘‘u’’
shape lining the lower half of the display
panel. Participants were asked to identify all
members of each equivalence class by clicking
on the stimuli (described to participants as a
‘‘set’’). There was one test trial for each set.
Phase 2—Vigilance Task (Control Group)
Control group participants did not com-
plete the stimulus equivalence program; these
351

Table 1
Overview of match-to-sample stimulus equivalence task.
Block
Process
Sample Stimuli
S+
S2
Criterion for progression
0.
Introduce A–B
A1; B1
Repeat twice for 5 s each.
A2; B2
A3; B3
1.
Train A–B
A1
B1
B2, B3
A2
B2
B1, B3
A3
B3
B1, B2
2.
Test symmetry
B–A
B1
A1
A2, A3
once only, in random position (left, center,
right). If any failed, retrain blocks 0 and 1
before retest.
B2
A2
A1, A3
B3
A3
A1, A2
3.
Train A–C
A1
C1
B2, B3
A2
C2
B1, B3
A3
C3
B1, B2
A1
C1
C2, C3
A2
C2
C1, C3
A3
C3
C1, C2
4.
Test symmetry
C–A
C1
A1
A2, A3
once only , in random position (left,
blocks 1 and 3 before retest.
C2
A2
A1, A3
C3
A3
A1, A2
5.
Test transitivity/
equivalence
B–C, C–B
B1
C1
C2, C3
blocks 1 and 3 before retest.
B2
C2
C1, C3
B3
C3
C1, C2
C1
B1
B2, B3
C2
B2
B1, B3
C3
B3
B1, B2
6.
Train B–D
B1
D1
C2, C3
B2
D2
C1, C3
B3
D3
C1, C2
B1
D1
D2, D3
B2
D2
D1, D3
B3
D3
D1, D2
7.
Test symmetry
D–B
D1
B1
B2, B3
blocks 1, 3 and 6 before retest.
D2
B2
B1, B3
D3
B3
B1, B2
8.
Test transitivity/
equivalence
D–A, D–C,
A–D, C–D
D1
A1
A2, A3
blocks 1, 3 and 6 before retest.
D2
A2
A1, A3
D3
A3
A1, A2
D1
C1
C2, C3
D2
C2
C1, C3
D3
C3
C1, C2
A1
D1
D2, D3
A2
D2
D1, D3
A3
D3
D1, D2
C1
D1
D2, D3
C2
D2
D1, D3
C3
D3
D1, D2
9.
Identify classes
A1
B1, C1,
D1
B2, C2, D2,
B3, C3, D3
Final test (score is recorded). No feedback
provided.
A2
B2, C2,
D2
B1, C1, D1,
B3, C3, D3
A3
B3, C3,
D3
B1, C1, D1,
B2, C2, D2
352

participants completed a vigilance task using
the same stimuli that the experimental group
had for the stimulus equivalence task test. The
vigilance task was a computer program super-
ficially similar to the equivalence task and
written using the same software. The vigilance
task consisted of a series of twenty 2-min blocks
where the stimuli were presented individually
on the screen, in random order, and at
random locations, for 2 s each. At the start of
the task, also described to participants as a test
of working memory, participants were told in
both oral and written on-screen instructions
that they were working on a ‘‘long-term
memory’’ task and a ‘‘working-memory’’ task
as follows:
‘‘You will be working on two different com-
puter programs in this session. The first
program is the working memory test. A series
of objects and letters will be displayed on the
screen. Your task is to identify a specific
sequence of objects and letters and press the
space bar after the LAST object in the
sequence is displayed [researcher draws a
sample sequence of one letter and two
coloured objects on the white board]. You
must disregard all objects which are not in the
target sequence. The target sequence will be
changed from time to time.
The objects include coloured shapes similar to
those used in Session 1 which you completed
earlier. This is because if we used totally
dissimilar objects, we could introduce a ‘con-
found’ into our study—that is—we would not
know whether any difference in performance
was due to the different memory task, or
because we used different types of objects in
the different tasks. Pay attention to both the
colour and the shape of each object; both
colour and shape may repeat in different
combinations.
When you have finished the working memory
task, let me know and I will start the long-term
memory test for you. After you have finished
that, I have a short feed-back form for you to fill
out, then a quick debrief and you are free to go.’’
At the start
of each
2-min block, the
participants were given the target sequence
for that block in on-screen instructions. Target
sequences became increasingly complex across
tasks. For example, on early trials, participants
were instructed to, ‘‘Hit the space bar when
you see a letter followed by a letter,’’ while on
later trials, they were instructed to, ‘‘Hit the
space bar when you see a letter, followed by a
red object, followed by a square.’’
The vigilance task exposed participants to
the stimuli for a total of 40 min during the
hour-long second session. An earlier series of
studies using the equivalence task with four
different groups of students had established
that while the time in the session was typically
30 to 40 min, the mean time actually exposed
to the equivalence stimuli (that is, time on-task
exclusive of reading instructions and pausing
between blocks) for these groups had been
close to 10 min (Challies, 2005). The present
vigilance task was designed to control for
familiarity with the Phase 2 stimuli by ensuring
that the control group had approximately the
same duration of exposure to each of the
stimuli. In the MTS task, four stimuli were
simultaneously presented, while in the vigi-
lance task the stimuli were presented individ-
ually. Forty min were used for the vigilance
task to ensure that each participant observed
stimuli for approximately the same amount of
time as participants who completed the MTS
task.
Phase 3—Recognition Test
The recognition test presented individual
stimuli (target patterns, lures and foils as
shown in Figure 2) sequentially in random
order. Three trials were the target patterns, the
three original patterns learned in Phase 1. A
further three trials were lures, patterns similar
to the targets but composed of the stimuli
from Phase 2. The remaining six trials were
foils, patterns which contained both novel
stimuli and at least one stimulus from the
target patterns.
Participants had been briefed that this
phase was the ‘‘long-term memory’’ test of
Table 2
Percentage of ‘‘old’’ responses to individual patterns.
Target 1
Target 2
Target 3
Lure 1
Lure 2
Lure3
All Foils
Experimental Group
95.83%
70.83%
83.33%
58.33%
54.17%
75.00%
8.00%
Control Group
91.67%
79.17%
95.83%
16.67%
4.17%
12.50%
1.00%
353

the original patterns they had memorized in
their earlier session; they were instructed to
view the patterns, identify old patterns from
Phase 1 by selecting the ‘‘Old’’ button, and
identify new patterns by selecting the ‘‘New’’
button. Note that this was the same response
method used in the exit test for Phase 1, so
participants were familiar with it. On-screen
instructions stated:
You will be shown a series of patterns, some of
which you memorized during the first session
(Memory Task I). Others will be new. Below
the pattern you will see two buttons labeled
‘Old’ and ‘New.’ For each pattern, click on the
‘Old’ button if it is one of the three you have
memorized from your first session. Click on
the ‘New’ button if the pattern is not one of
the original three from the first session.
Following Phase 3, participants were given an
oral debrief which began by asking, ‘‘Did you
notice any links or similarities between the
Working Memory task, and the final Memory test
of the photos? If yes, what were any linkages or
similarities between the two tasks?’’ The experi-
menter noted their answers and continued the
oral debrief by outlining the actual objectives of
the study and the need for the original deception.
RESULTS
Of the 26 experimental-group participants
who returned for the second session, 24
completed the stimulus equivalence task with-
in the 60 min allocated for the task in total
(including instructions). The following analy-
sis excludes the nonfinishers (n52). All mem-
bers of the control group returned for the
second session (n524) and no adjustment of
group size was required to facilitate statistical
analysis. The success of the deception was
confirmed by oral feedback: None of the
participants
identified
similarities
between
the sets learned in Phase 2 and the patterns
used in Phase 1, other than use of the same
type of stimuli (colored shapes). Moreover,
none suspected that the Phase 2 task might
interfere with the Phase 1 task.
Responses to Target Patterns, Lures, and Foils
The percentage of ‘‘old’’ responses to the
three types of stimuli is presented in Figure 4.
This figure shows that the percentage of ‘‘old’’
responses to the target (83% and 89%) and foil
(8% and 1%) patterns was similar across the
experimental and control groups, respectively.
That is, participants generally correctly identi-
fied the target patterns as old, and correctly
identified the foil patterns as new. This figure
also shows there was a clear difference between
groups in their responses to the lure patterns.
The experimental group tended to incorrectly
identify lures as old (63% of trials), albeit less
frequently than the targets were identified as
old. The control group, however, responded to
lures as they did to the foils (‘‘old’’ was the
response on 11% of trials). That is, whereas
experimental participants tended to identify
the lure patterns as old, the control participants
tended to correctly identify them as new.
Responses to individual patterns and lures are
detailed in Table 2.
A 2 3 3 mixed-design ANOVA revealed a
significant main effect of group, F (1, 46) 5
34.83, p , .001, partial g2 5 .431, and a
significant main effect of pattern type, F (1.53,
70.46) 5 223.40, p , .001, partial g2 5 .829.
There was a
significant
interaction
effect
between group and pattern type, F (1.53,
70.46) 5 29.40, p 5 ,.001, partial g2 5 .39.
Where
Mauchly’s
test
indicated
that
the
assumption of sphericity had been violated,
degrees of freedom were corrected using
Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity.
Post hoc analyses using pairwise compari-
sons of responses to patterns within groups
and a Bonferroni correction for multiple tests
indicated that, for the control group, there was
no significant difference between responses
to the foil and lure patterns (1% and 8%
respectively), but that there were significantly
more ‘‘old’’ responses to the target patterns
(89%) than to both foil and lure patterns. For
the experimental group, there were significant
differences between all pattern types, meaning
that there were more ‘‘old’’ responses to
targets than both foils and lures but also more
‘‘old’’ responses to lures than to foils.
This pattern of responding can also be
observed at the individual subject level. Every
participant in the experimental group re-
sponded ‘‘old’’ to at least one of the lure
patterns and 58% responded ‘‘old’’ to two or
more lures (see Appendix A). By contrast, 71%
of participants in the control group did not
respond ‘‘old’’ to any lure and only 1 partici-
pant responded ‘‘old’’ to more than one lure
(see Appendix B).
354

Further analyses were carried out to ensure
that the differences between the experimental
and control groups were due to equivalence
training, and not due to differences in initial
recall of the target patterns following the
learning task, or differences in the duration
of exposure to the Phase 2 stimuli in the
experimental context. Additionally, the influ-
ence of acquisition rate in the MTS task was
considered.
Initial Recall Performance
There were no significant differences be-
tween the two groups in performance on the
Phase
1
task.
All
participants
successfully
completed the pattern recognition task within
the 30 minutes allotted. Four control and 5
experimental participants required, and suc-
cessfully completed, retraining within that
time.
There
were
no
differences
in
task
completion time between the control group
(M 5 19.50 min, SD 5 4.46), and the
experimental group (M 5 18.28 min, SD 5
5.41), t (46) 5 .37, n.s.
Duration of Exposure to Phase 2 Stimuli
The vigilance task appeared to adequately
control for mean duration of exposure to the
Phase
2
stimuli.
The
control
group
was
exposed to the 12 stimuli in random sequence
for 40 min; a mean time of 3 min 20 s for each
stimulus. The mean time spent on-task (with
the
Phase
2
stimuli
on
screen)
for
the
experimental group was 9 min 55 s in total
(SD 5 4 min 37 s). Only four of the stimuli
were on screen at any one time during the
MTS task, resulting in a mean exposure of
3 min 18 s for any given stimulus.
In
addition,
there
were
no
effects
of
exposure time within the experimental group.
The time taken to complete the MTS task
varied considerably across participants; the
fastest participant spent 4 min 1 s on-task,
while the slowest participant spent 20 min 17 s
on-task. Although there was a wide variation in
the time taken to complete the MTS task,
there was no relation between the time it took
to complete the task and the number of ‘‘old’’
responses to the lures (R2 5 .0045).
Fig. 4.
Mean percentage of ‘‘old’’ responses to each type of pattern for the control (vigilance task) and experimental
(MTS task) groups in the recognition test. ‘‘Old’’ responses to target patterns are correct identifications, but ‘‘old’’
responses to lures and foil patterns are false recognitions. Error bars indicate standard error.
355

Match-to-Sample Task Acquisition
One explanation for the observed wide
variation in the duration of time needed to
acquire the stimulus equivalence task is that
participants who failed a testing block repeat-
ed baseline training and were then retested
(see Table 1). Time to complete MTS training
and testing was moderately correlated with
the number of test phases required to reach
criterion (R2 5 .69). Most participants had
little difficulty with B–A and C–A symmetry,
but about half the participants needed retrain-
ing to acquire B–C/C–B transitivity and D–B
symmetry. Only 3 participants acquired A–D/
D–A and C–D/D–C transitivity without base-
line retraining. Only 1 participant completed
the entire task without retraining on any block.
At the conclusion of the MTS training, the
participants were asked to select all the mem-
bers of each set. Only 3 participants made one
error each (out of nine responses). A summary
of individual data for the experimental group
is in Appendix A.
DISCUSSION
The results supported the hypothesis that
stimulus equivalence may contribute to some
instances of responding to lures in a manner
analogous to some descriptions of the misin-
formation effect in the cognitive literature. At
the recognition test, experimental participants
were significantly more likely to respond to
lure patterns as old (63%) than control
participants (11%). The high rate of ‘‘old’’
responses to lures, however, did not prevent
experimental
participants
from
accurately
identifying
target
patterns
(83%)
as
old.
Moreover, the experimental group correctly
identified the target patterns as old on a
similar percentage of trials as the control
participants (89%). Both groups had a very
low percentage of ‘‘old’’ responses to the foil
(distracter) patterns (8% and 1% respective-
ly). The tendency to respond to both target
and lure patterns as old at the recognition test
by the experimental group is consistent with
patterns of responding demonstrated in cog-
nitive research on the misinformation effect
(e.g., Eakin, Schreiber, & Sergent-Marshall,
2003).
However,
the
high
rate
of
‘‘old’’
responses to the target patterns indicates that
the effect seen in this study is not due to either
forgetting or interference with recognition of
the original stimulus.
Methodological Issues
In an experiment involving similar stimuli
presented as targets, lures, and foils, some
minor effects of familiarity, generalization,
and partial stimulus control are to be expect-
ed. Of importance is that these effects are
minimized
and
measurable,
and
contrast
significantly with the misinformation effect
due to emergent relations. All of the foil
patterns used in this experiment contained at
least one component from the target patterns.
During Phase 1 training, participants learned
that foil patterns could contain a component
from the target pattern, and they were trained
to respond ‘‘new’’ to patterns that did not
contain all the correct components in the
proper configuration. The Phase 1 constructed-
response task and recognition tests also en-
sured that participants attended to all the
dimensions upon which the patterns could
vary: the color and shape of each component,
and the configuration of the pattern. This
strategy succeeded in keeping responses to foils
very low.
For both groups, it was expected that lures
would be somewhat more difficult to discrim-
inate from targets than foils as they varied
from target patterns on only one dimension
in one component (the color of one of the
internal components). However, the results
from the control group demonstrate that the
target
and
lure
patterns
were
sufficiently
discriminable for the task.
The experimental group also showed a
slight increase in ‘‘old’’ responses to foils
(8%) relative to the control group (1%), a
nonsignificant trend also
seen across the
earlier series of unpublished studies (Challies,
2005). On examination of these responses, it
was found that the effect was due to Foils 2 and
6 (see Figure 2) attracting a few more ‘‘old’’
responses than other foils. Foils 2 and 6
happen to share a color combination with
Lure 3. It is possible that the slightly greater
percentage of ‘‘old’’ responses by the exper-
imental group to the foils is due to familiarity
with that color combination because it was
established during the Phase 2 MTS training,
was not shared with any of the target patterns,
and was not experienced by the control group.
In spite of this, experimental group responses
356

to lures (68%) display a significant contrast
with their responses to foils (8%). Thus, in this
experiment, the small effects of familiarity
contrast significantly with the misinformation
effect due to emergent relations.
Emergent Relations and Semantic Relations
The results of this experiment support the
findings of Guinther and Dougher (2010) that
in some instances derived relations are a
behavioral analog to semantic relatedness in
the cognitive psychology literature. The results
of this experiment also extend the relationship
between emergent relations and ‘‘false mem-
ory’’ to the postevent misinformation effect.
Emergent relations that develop subsequent
to a target event have the potential to alter
recognition of elements of that event. Cogni-
tive researchers (Hannigan & Tippens Reinitz,
2001; Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Loftus & Zanni,
1975) have demonstrated the enhancement
of the misinformation effect when ‘‘semantic
construal’’ allows a foreign element to enter
into a person’s remembered account of an
event, as compared to simple familiarity with
the same foreign element. This experiment
demonstrates that emergent relations may
function as semantic construal in a behavioral
analog of the misinformation effect. It should
be stressed that there are likely to be a wide
variety of causes of ‘‘false memory,’’ many of
which likely interact with other causes and with
individual
differences,
and
that
emergent
relations may be one of many potential contri-
buting factors to the misinformation effect.
In line with findings in the cognitive psychol-
ogy literature (Lindsay, 1990; Lindsay, Allen, et
al., 2004; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000), it is likely
that the misinformation effect is contingent on
the degree to which the source of the information
is confused between the original event and the
novel misinformation. When the source of
misinformation is highly discriminable, misinfor-
mation is less likely to be incorporated into an
account of an event. As noted earlier, source
discriminability may arguably be analogous with
context in the behavioral literature (Dougher, et
al., 2002; Meehan & Fields, 1995; Randell &
Remington, 2006; Rehfeldt, 2003). In the present
study, there was likely little discriminability
between the original source (the Phase 1 task),
and the source of the misinformation (the Phase
2 task). Both of the tasks were delivered in a
similar context—a ‘‘memory’’ study conducted in
a computer laboratory by the same experimenter,
with similar stimuli and peripheral details. It is
possible that manipulating the context within
which original and misinformation stimuli are
presented may impact on the strength of the
misinformation effect—more discriminable con-
texts may increase the likelihood of participants
correctly responding ‘‘new’’ to the lure patterns.
The procedures used to investigate emergent
relations as the source of misinformation in the
present study may be compared to misinforma-
tion research in the cognitive literature. Partic-
ipants in the present study were given up to
30 min (inclusive of briefing times) to memorize
the original stimuli, had repeated viewings,
constructed the pattern from its components,
and were tested to ensure memory for all key
components
of
the
target
patterns
before
proceeding to the misinformation phase of the
study. In contrast, initial exposure to the target
event in typical misinformation studies is usually
very brief, as researchers attempt to re-create
real-life experiences (Memon, Hope, & Bull,
2003). Standard misinformation studies may
expose participants to a target slide or photo-
graph once for a matter of seconds (Lindsay,
Allen, et al., 2004; Memon, et al., 2003; Vornik,
Sharman, & Garry, 2003), have participants view
a video once only (Kneller, Memon, & Steve-
nage, 2001; Searcy et al., 2000; Sutherland &
Hayne, 2001) or listen to a narrative once only
(Chandler et al., 2001). Many misinformation
studies in the cognitive literature therefore rely
on the target event being poorly observed and/
or learned, with laboratory findings then applied
in forensic settings (Wells et al., 2000). In spite of
extensive exposure to the target stimuli, and a
100% test criterion for progression to Phase 2,
the present study demonstrated a robust misin-
formation effect due to emergent relations in
conditions of contextual similarity. This high-
lights the potential vulnerability of delayed
recognition, in a real-world situation, to poste-
vent misinformation from emergent relations.
Suggestions for Future Research
Colored geometric shapes had been select-
ed for simplicity and utility in constructing
patterns. Although they proved adequate for
the task, there were differences in responding
(for both groups) to different patterns noted
across the series, with Target Pattern 2 and
Lure 2 attracting fewer ‘‘old’’ responses. Dif-
ferences in responding across patterns (which
357

affected both experimental and control groups)
may have reflected common prior learning
histories for some participants (e.g., some
elements may have been more familiar). Future
research could norm patterns for familiarity
and select patterns with common levels of
familiarity.
Research on compound stimuli has shown
that emergent relations may be reliably dem-
onstrated following go/no-go procedures with-
out the requirement for MTS training (Debert,
Huziwara, Faggiani, De Mathis, & McIlvane,
2009; Debert, Matos, & McIlvane, 2007). It is
possible that the memorization task itself
established equivalence relations between the
three stimuli comprising the target pattern.
If this were the case, the lure stimulus need only
have been trained to one of the original stimuli
without the requirement for MTS training of
the remaining baseline relations. For
the
present study, an important consideration was
to optimize the conditions under which con-
textual confusion might occur; this included
incorporating the other elements of the pattern
into the MTS task, even though only one of
them was actually trained to the lure stimulus.
Having established that emergent relations do
underlie some manifestations of the misinfor-
mation effect, future research could investigate
the phenomenon using non-MTS procedures.
A further research direction is suggested by the
wide variation in time spent on-task by the
experimental group during the Phase 2 MTS
task. Although there was no relationship between
the percentage of correct responses to lures and
the time spent acquiring the MTS task, it did
become apparent across this and the prior series
of unpublished studies (Challies, 2005) that some
participants were using a variety of verbal and
subvocal strategies. This raised the possibility that
verbal strategies may have had an impact on time
taken to complete the MTS task. Participants in
this study were not given any advice at all on how
to associate the stimuli in the MTS classes, and
those who vocalized strategies, or appeared to be
using subvocal strategies, did so with varying
degrees of success. Consequently, those who used
a strategy are not distinguishable from those who
didn’t, either by time or by the number of test
phases needed to acquire the task. Research in
progress is investigating the impact of instructing
participants to use an efficient verbal rule to
acquire the MTS task. One question addressed in
this research is whether the strategy used impacts
the transfer of function or changes the discrim-
inability of the context.
In summary, the present study provides
further support to the thesis that even when
initial recognition of elements of a target event
is
excellent, contextual confusion between
classes of stimuli pertaining to the target event,
including those formed subsequently, may allow
false recognition of elements associated with the
target event by emergent relations Further,
stimulus equivalence and emergent relations
have the potential to allow a behavioral–
experimental investigation of cognitive con-
structs which have traditionally been largely
confined to the cognitive literature. In this
account of false memories, they are seen as a by-
product of stimulus equivalence and emergent
relations. The same learning mechanisms that
allow for efficient categorization of novel stimuli
within existing equivalence classes are also
responsible for some instances of the misinfor-
mation effect. Some false memories are there-
fore not a sign of pathology or deficiency, but
are a normal part of human behavior.
REFERENCES
Allen, B. P., & Lindsay, D. S. (1998). Amalgamations of
memories: Intrusion of information from one event
into reports of another. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 12,
277–285.
Arntzen, E. (2004). Probability of equivalence formation:
Familiar stimuli and training sequence. The Psycholog-
ical Record, 54, 275–291.
Belli, R. F. (1989). Influences of misleading postevent
information: Misinformation interference and accep-
tance. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
118(1), 72–85.
Challies, D. M. (2005). Stimulus Equivalence and False
Memory. Unpublished dissertation, Victoria Universi-
ty of Wellington, Wellington.
Chandler, C. C., Gargano, G. J., & Holt, B. C. (2001).
Witnessing postevents does not change memory
traces, but can affect their retrieval. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 3–22.
Debert, P., Huziwara, E. M., Faggiani, R. B., De Mathis, M.
E. S., & McIlvane, W. J. (2009). Emergent conditional
relations in a go/no-go procedure: Figure–ground
and stimulus–position compound relations. Journal
of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 92(2),
233–243.
Debert, P., Matos, M. A., & McIlvane, W. J. (2007).
Conditional relations with compound abstract stimuli
using a go/no-go procedure. Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 87(1), 89–96.
De Rose, J. C., De Souza, D. G., & Hanna, E. S. (1996).
Teaching reading and spelling: Exclusion and stimu-
lus equivalence. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 29,
451–469.
358

Dougher, M. J. (1998). Stimulus equivalence and the
untrained acquisition of stimulus functions. Behavior
Therapy, 29, 577–591.
Dougher, M. J., & Markham, M. R. (1996). Stimulus classes
and the untrained acquisition of stimulus functions.
In T. R. Zentall, & P. M. Smeets (Eds.), Stimulus class
formation in humans and animals (pp. 137–152).
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.
Dougher, M. J., Perkins, D. R., Greenway, D., Koons, A., &
Chiasson, C. (2002). Contextual control of equiva-
lence-based transformation of functions. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 78(1), 63–93.
Dube, W. V., McDonald, S. J., McIlvane, W. J., & MacKay,
H. A. (1991). Constructed-response matching to
sample and spelling instruction. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 24, 305–317.
Eakin, D. K., Schreiber, T. A., & Sergent-Marshall, S.
(2003). Misinformation effects in eyewitness memory:
The presence and absence of memory impairment as
a function of warning and misinformation accessibil-
ity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 29(5), 813–825.
Ferrari, C., de Rose, J. C., & McIlvane, W. J. (1993).
Exclusion vs. selection training of auditory–visual
conditional relations. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 56, 49–63.
Ferrari, C., De Rose, J. C., & McIlvane, W. J. (2008). A
comparison of exclusion and trial-and-error proce-
dures: primary and secondary effects. Experimental
Analysis of Human Behavior Bulletin, 29, 9–16.
Gerrie, M. P., Belcher, L. E., & Garry, M. (2006). ‘Mind the
gap’: false memories for missing aspects of an event.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20(5), 689–696.
Gross, S. R., Jacoby, K., Matheson, D. J., Montgomery, N.,
& Patil, S. (2005). Exonerations in the United States
1989 through 2003. The Journal of Criminal Law &
Criminology, 95(2), http://law-journals-books.vlex.com/
vid/in-the-united-states-through-55615176.
Guinther, P. M., & Dougher, M. J. (2010). Semantic false
memories in the form of derived relational intrusions
following training. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 93(3), 329–347.
Hannigan, S. L., & Tippens Reinitz, M. (2001). A demon-
stration and comparison of two types of inference-based
memory errors. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 27(4), 931–940.
Harper, D. N., & Garry, M. (2000). Postevent cues bias
recognition performance in pigeons. Animal Learning
& Behavior, 28(1), 59–67.
Henkel, L. A., Franklin, N., & Johnson, M. K. (2000).
Cross-modal source monitoring confusions between
perceived and imagined events. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(2),
321–335.
Horne, P. J., & Lowe, C. F. (1996). On the origins of
naming and other symbolic behavior. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 65, 185–241.
Jenkins, J. J., Wald, J., & Pittenger, J. B. (1986). Appre-
hending pictorial events. In V. McCabe, & G. J.
Balzano (Eds.), Event cognition: An ecological perspective
(pp. 117–133). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kneller, W., Memon, A., & Stevenage, S. (2001). Simulta-
neous and sequential lineups: Decision processes of
accurate and inaccurate eyewitnesses. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 15, 659–671.
Lindsay, D. S. (1990). Misleading suggestions can impair
eyewitnesses’ ability to remember event details. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, 16(6), 1077–1083.
Lindsay, D. S., Allen, B. P., Chan, J. C. K., & Dahl, L. C. (2004).
Eyewitness suggestibility and source similarity: Intrusions
of details from one event into memory reports of another
event. Journal of Memory and Language, 50, 96–111.
Lindsay, D. S., Hagen, L., Wade, K. A., & Garry, M. (2004).
True photographs and false memories. Psychological
Science, 15, 149–154.
Loftus, E. F. (1975). Leading questions and the eyewitness
report. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 560–572.
Loftus, E. F. (1979). The malleability of human memory.
American Scientist, 67, 312–320.
Loftus, E. F., & Hoffman, H. G. (1989). Misinformation
and memory: The creation of new memories. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 118(1), 100–104.
Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G., & Burns, H. J. (1978). Semantic
integration of verbal information into a visual memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and
Memory, 4(1), 19–31.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of
automobile destruction: An example of the interac-
tion between language and memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585–589.
Loftus, E. F., & Zanni, G. (1975). Eyewitness testimony:
The influence of the wording of a question. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society, 5(1), 86–88.
Lyle, K. B., & Johnson, M. K. (2006). Importing perceived
features into false memories. Memory, 14(2), 197–213.
Marche, T. A., Brainerd, C. J., & Reyna, V. F. (2010).
Distinguishing true from false memories in forensic
contexts: Can phenomenology tell us what is real?
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(8), 1168–1182.
Meehan, E. F., & Fields, L. (1995). Contextual control of new
equivalence classes. The Psychological Record, 45, 165–182.
Meeter, M., Shohamy, D., & Myers, C. E. (2009). Acquired
equivalence changes stimulus representations. Journal
of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 91(1), 127–141.
Memon, A., Hope, L., & Bull, R. (2003). Exposure
duration: Effects on eyewitness accuracy and confi-
dence. British Journal of Psychology, 94, 339–354.
Mitchell, K. J., & Johnson, M. K. (2000). Source monitoring:
Attributing mental experiences. In E. Tulving, & F. I.
M. Craik (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of memory (pp. 179–
195). New York: Oxford University Press.
Mitchell, K. J., & Zaragoza, M. (1996). Repeated exposure to
suggestion and false memory: The role of contextual
variability. Journal of Memory and Language, 35, 246–260.
Mitchell, K. J., & Zaragoza, M. (2001). Contextual overlap
and eyewitness suggestibility. Memory & Cognition,
29(4), 616–626.
Okado, Y., & Stark, C. E. L. (2005). Neural activity during
encoding predicts false memories created by misin-
formation. Learning & Memory, 12(1), 3–11.
Randell, T., & Remington, B. (2006). Equivalence rela-
tions, contextual control, and naming. Journal of the
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 86(3), 337–354.
Rehfeldt, R. A. (2003). Establishing contextual control
over generalized equivalence relations. The Psycholog-
ical Record, 53, 415–428.
Rehfeldt, R. A., & Hayes, L. J. (1998). The operant–
respondent distinction revisited: toward an under-
standing of stimulus equivalence. The Psychological
Record, 48(2), 187–210.
359

Roediger III, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating
false memories: Remembering words not presented in
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 21, 802–814.
Searcy, J., Bartlett, J. C., & Memon, A. (2000). Influence of post-
event narratives, line-up conditions and individual differ-
ences on false identification by young and older eye-
witnesses. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 5, 219–235.
Sidman, M. (1994). Equivalence relations and behavior: A
research story. Boston, MA: Authors Cooperative.
Sidman, M., & Tailby, W. (1982). Conditional discrimina-
tion vs. matching to sample: An expansion of the
testing paradigm Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
Behavior, 37(1), 5–22.
Skagerberg, E. M., & Wright, D. B. (2008). The co-witness
misinformation effect: Memory blends or memory
compliance? Memory, 16(4), 436–442.
Stark, C. E. L., Okado, Y., & Loftus, E. F. (2010). Imaging
the reconstruction of true and false memories using
sensory reactivation and the misinformation para-
digms. Learning & Memory, 17(10), 485–488.
Sutherland, R., & Hayne, H. (2001). The effect of
postevent information on adults’ eyewitness reports.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15, 249–263.
Tonneau, F. (2001). Equivalence relations: A critical
analysis. European Journal of Behavior Analysis, 2(1), 1–33.
Vornik, L. A., Sharman, S. J., & Garry, M. (2003). The
power of the spoken word: Sociolinguistic cues
influence the misinformation effect. Memory, 11(1),
101–109.
Wells, G. L., Malpass, R. S., Lindsay, R. C. L., Fisher,
R. P., Turtle, J. W., & Fulero, S. M. (2000). From the
lab to the police station: A successful application of
eyewitness research. American Psychologist, 55(6),
581–598.
Wirth, O., & Chase, P. N. (2002). Stability of functional
equivalence and stimulus equivalence: Effects of
baseline reversals. Journal of the Experimental Analysis
of Behavior, 77(1), 29–47.
Wright, D. B., & Loftus, E. F. (1998). How misinformation
alters memories. Journal of Experimental Child Psycholo-
gy, 71, 155–164.
Wright, D. B., Self, G., & Justice, C. (2000). Memory
conformity: Exploring misinformation effects when
presented by another person. British Journal of
Psychology, 91, 189–202.
Yamamoto, J., & Asano, T. (1995). Stimulus equivalence in
a chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes). The Psychological Record,
45, 3–21.
Received: April 29, 2011
Final Acceptance: August 9, 2011
APPENDIX A
Summary of Individual Data for Control Task Group
Participant
Number of attempts at each test block (see Table 1) to achieve 100% criterion for progression to next
training block.
B-A Symmetry
C-A Symmetry
B-C/C-B Transitivity
D-B Symmetry
D-A/A-D/D-C/C-D
Transitivity
a100782
2
2
2
2
3
a1984
1
2
2
1
1
ad260287
1
1
1
1
2
CA020787
1
1
1
2
2
dl240887
1
1
1
1
2
dt050565
1
1
5
1
6
ed090884
1
1
4
2
2
HT021084
1
1
1
1
2
ja061086
1
1
2
2
6
KB1987
1
1
1
4
7
LM310783
1
1
2
1
2
mb191185
1
1
1
2
3
me190886
2
1
1
1
1
mh120786
1
1
1
2
2
mk281184
1
1
1
1
3
ms020587
1
1
1
1
1
nk050984
1
1
2
1
4
ns080686
1
1
2
1
3
PD200686
1
1
1
2
6
pf220684
1
1
1
2
2
SM110685
1
1
2
1
2
sp170286
1
3
1
4
4
Unk1
1
1
2
3
6
YW030583
1
1
4
2
3
Mean
1.08
1.17
1.75
1.71
3.13
MS160976*
1
2
2
6
3 (block abandoned)
sr120287*
1
3
14 (block abandoned)
*These two participants did not finish the MTS task within the time allocated for the session and were removed from
analysis.
360

Number of attempts at each test
block (see Table 1) to achieve
100% criterion for progression
to next training block.
Final test score (selection of class
members of set A, B, and C respectively
given the letter for each set)
Phase 3 recognition test ‘‘old’’ responses
Total Test
Blocks
Time taken
(Min.S)
Target
Lure
Foil
11
12.02
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
2
1
7
8.12
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
3
1
6
4.01
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
3
2
7
8.32
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
2
0
6
5.19
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
2
1
14
13.13
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
3
0
10
8.00
2/3
3/3
3/3
3
1
0
6
4.59
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
1
1
12
12.45
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
2
1
14
19.17
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
1
0
7
6.00
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
3
0
8
5.56
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
2
0
6
4.07
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
1
0
7
10.49
3/3
2/3
3/3
3
1
0
7
8.32
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
1
1
5
4.25
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
3
1
9
17.22
3/3
2/3
3/3
3
3
0
8
9.36
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
1
0
11
14.20
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
2
1
7
9.08
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
2
0
7
6.04
3/3
3/3
3/3
2
1
1
13
13.44
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
3
0
13
20.17
3/3
3/3
3/3
1
1
0
11
11.10
3/3
3/3
3/3
3
1
0
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
APPENDIX A
(Extended)
361

APPENDIX B
Summary of Individual Data for
Control Task Group
Participant
Phase 3 recognition test ‘old’ responses
Target
Lure
Foils
a290376
3
0
0
a15031974
2
1
1
a8352
3
0
0
AB070785
3
0
0
AG091188
3
0
0
AJR14/07/87
3
1
0
AK161085
3
0
0
CJ090888
3
1
0
CS031006
3
0
0
DCLXVI
3
0
0
ej140987
3
0
0
ek180288
2
1
0
GZ861010
2
2
0
HM170189
3
0
0
JH13101987
3
0
0
kr050587
3
0
0
me180386
3
0
0
ns050288
1
1
0
Renee’
3
0
0
SA831127
3
0
0
SC080188
3
0
0
sr
1
1
0
ss130988
2
0
0
SW240687
3
0
0
362