Source monitoring 15 years later: What have we learned from
fMRI about the neural mechanisms of source memory?
Karen J. Mitchell and Marcia K. Johnson
Yale University
Abstract
The systematic study of source memory provides a useful approach to investigating the features
that give memories their episodic character, the associative, organizational, or binding processes
that connect features, and the access and evaluation processes involved in attributing current
mental experiences to memories of past events. This review illustrates how neuroimaging is
contributing to our understanding of the brain mechanisms involved in source memory. Focusing
primarily on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), we review evidence regarding the
roles of various subregions of the medial temporal lobes, prefrontal cortex, posterior
representational areas, and parietal cortex in source memory. We also consider relevant studies
assessing the qualitative characteristics of episodic memories, the encoding and remembering of
emotional information, and false memories, as well as studies of several populations that show
disrupted source memory (older adults, individuals with depression, posttraumatic stress disorder,
or schizophrenia). Although there is still substantial work to be done, functional neuroimaging is
making good on its promise to advance our understanding of source memory. A continued two-
way interaction between cognitive theory, as illustrated by the Source Monitoring Framework
(Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993), and evidence from systematic cognitive neuroimaging
studies should help further clarify our conceptualization of cognitive processes (e.g., feature
binding, retrieval, monitoring), prior knowledge (e.g., semantics, schemas), and specific features
(e.g., perceptual and emotional information), and of how they combine to create true and false
memories.
In 1993, Psychological Bulletin published a paper titled Source Monitoring (Johnson,
Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993) that outlined a conceptual framework for organizing empirical
findings and theorizing about the factors involved in attributing the source of mental
experiences (the Source Monitoring Framework [SMF]; see also, Johnson & Raye, 1981).
Since then, across many labs, the SMF has provided a useful approach to investigating the
features that give memories their episodic character, the associative (organizational,
binding) processes that connect features, and the access and evaluation processes involved in
taking subjective experiences to be representations of past events. In the 1993 paper,
Johnson, Hashtroudi, and Lindsay included a brief discussion of the brain areas likely
involved in source monitoring that was based primarily on findings from neuropsychological
studies of patient populations and cognitive aging studies, but they also made passing
reference to the promise of “new developments in neuroimaging” techniques to advance our
Correspondence to: Karen J. Mitchell, Department of Psychology, Yale University, Box 208205, New Haven, CT 06520-8205,
karen.mitchell@yale.edu, Phone: 203.432.4654, Fax: 203.436.4617.
Publisher's Disclaimer: The following manuscript is the final accepted manuscript. It has not been subjected to the final copyediting,
fact-checking, and proofreading required for formal publication. It is not the definitive, publisher-authenticated version. The American
Psychological Association and its Council of Editors disclaim any responsibility or liabilities for errors or omissions of this manuscript
version, any version derived from this manuscript by NIH, or other third parties. The published version is available at
www.apa.org/journals/bul.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
Psychol Bull. 2009 July ; 135(4): 638–677. doi:10.1037/a0015849.

understanding (p. 19). The current paper is an update on those developments: a selective
review and discussion of how functional neuroimaging is contributing to our understanding
of the cognitive and neural mechanisms involved in source memory. Indications so far are
that the approach is making good on its promise. Functional neuroimaging is proving a
useful tool for clarifying and testing theoretical characterizations of qualitative features and
processes of human memory such as those proposed by the SMF, and conversely, theoretical
characterizations such as proposed by the SMF are informing and guiding neuroimaging
investigations (see also, e.g., Davachi & Dobbins, 2008; Johnson, Verfaellie, & Dunlosky,
2008 for further discussion of the benefits of such a synergistic approach).
Of course, optimal advance is likely to be made when functional neuroimaging findings are
considered in light of the broader cognitive psychology and neuroscience literatures. Thus,
although we do not discuss it in detail, important evidence regarding the brain correlates of
source memory continues to come from neuropsychological studies of brain-damaged
patients (see Eichenbaum, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2007;Johnson, Hayes, D’Esposito, &
Raye, 2000; Johnson & Raye, 2000; Moscovitch, 1995; Schnider, 2008; Shimamura, 1995;
Squire, Knowlton, & Musen, 1993, for reviews), animal studies (see, Eichenbaum, Fortin,
Ergorul, & Robitsek, 2008; Eichenbaum et al., 2007; Riccio, Ackil, & Burch-Vernon, 1992;
Squire & Zola-Morgan, 1991, for reviews), and human developmental behavioral studies
with both children (see, Newcombe, Lloyd, & Ratcliff, 2007, for a review) and older adults
(see, Naveh-Benjamin & Old, 2008; Old & Naveh-Benjamin 2008; Zacks & Hasher, 2006,
for reviews). and insights also come from neurocomputational modeling (Elfman, Parks, &
Yonelinas, 2008; Li, Naveh-Benjamin, Linenberger, 2005; Norman, Detre, & Polyn, 2008;
Norman & O’Reilly, 2003) and other quantitative modeling approaches (Banks, 2000;
Batchelder & Riefer, 1990; Bayen, Murnane, & Erdfelder, 1996; Glanzer, Hilford, & Kim,
2004; Meiser & Bröder, 2002; Meiser & Sattler, 2007; Rotello, Macmillan, & Reeder, 2004;
Slotnick, Klein, Dodson, & Shimamura, 2000; Wixted, 2007).
The present discussion, however, is intended to illustrate how functional neuroimaging is
contributing to our understanding of the brain mechanisms involved in source memory. We
focus primarily on functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies because this
technique affords both the possibility to examine item-related brain activity (e.g., associated
with correct vs incorrect memory responses) and a degree of spatial resolution that allows
fair specificity with respect to the brain areas involved. The interested reader also can find
relevant studies that involve positron emission tomography (PET; Anderson, Iidaka, Cabeza,
Kapur, McIntosh, & Craik, 2000; Cabeza, Anderson, Houle, Mangels, & Nyberg, 2000;
Henke, Buck, Weber, & Weisser, 1997; Henke, Weber, Kneifel, Wieser, & Buck, 1999;
Schacter et al., 1996) and event-related potentials (ERP; Dywan, Segalowitz, & Arsenault,
2002; Johnson, Kounios, & Nolde, 1997; Johnson, Nolde, et al., 1997; Leynes & Phillips,
2008; Swick, Senkfor, Van Petten, 2006; Van Petten, Luka, Rubin, & Ryan, 2002; see also,
Friedman & Johnson, 2000; Paller, 2004; Paller, Voss, & Boehm, 2007; Rugg & Curran,
2007, for reviews), the latter of which adds to our understanding of the temporal
characteristics of source memory, as well. In addition, studies using transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS), which permits temporary in vivo disruption of neural functioning in
humans in specific brain areas, has begun to provide evidence regarding the causal role in
episodic memory of brain areas identified by other methods (Köhler, Paus, Buckner, &
Milner, 2004; Rossi et al., 2006).
fMRI findings regarding source memory mechanisms are being reported at an increasingly
rapid pace. We have not attempted to provide an exhaustive review, but rather to highlight
both the considerable progress that has been made and a number of key theoretical and
empirical puzzles still to be solved. Undoubtedly, some of the specific conclusions of the
presented studies will be supplanted (or understood differently) in the future. Nevertheless,
Page 2

this overview should provide behavioral scientists and neuroscientists with useful pointers to
an increasingly rich literature on the cognitive neuroscience of source memory. Though we
focus on fMRI studies, and use the SMF to guide interpretations in this review, we draw on
results from multiple theoretical and experimental approaches to understanding the
processes, and neural mechanisms, involved in creating, remembering, and misremembering
events.
Because this review is intended to highlight the synergistic relationship between empirical
neuroimaging findings and cognitive theory development, we begin with a brief summary of
key theoretical tenets of the SMF and then review fMRI evidence that speaks to the roles of
various subregions of the medial temporal lobes, prefrontal cortex, posterior representational
areas, and parietal cortex in the basic processes involved in source memory. We then
consider how fMRI studies are helping to address fundamental issues associated with source
memory, including assessing the qualitative characteristics of episodic memories, encoding
and remembering of emotional information, and the development of false memories. We
also consider what is being learned by studying changes in brain activity associated with the
disruptions in source memory often seen in older adults, as well as individuals with
depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, or schizophrenia. We end by commenting on
progress to date, as well as outlining issues still to be resolved. We believe that optimal
scientific progress in our understanding of the cognitive and neural mechanisms of source
memory will be best made if empirical evidence is derived from systematic behavioral and
neuroimaging studies guided by cognitive theory (e.g., the SMF, Johnson et al., 1993), and
theorizing is, in turn, informed and constrained by the empirical findings from such studies.
A THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVE: THE SOURCE MONITORING
FRAMEWORK
Critical to the SMF approach (Johnson, 2006; Johnson et al., 1993; Johnson & Raye, 1981,
2000; Lindsay, 2008; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000) is the idea that the features that make up
complex event memories, whether derived from perception or thought (e.g., imagination,
inference), include perceptual information (e.g., color, size, taste), spatial details (e.g., left or
right on the screen, location in a room), temporal details (e.g., time of day, season), semantic
information (e.g., gist, category membership, associated items), emotional information (e.g.,
how we or others felt), records of the cognitive operations engaged (e.g., imaging, carrying
out a mathematical calculation), and so on. When bound together, it is such specific details
that differentiate one event from another –that make a memory episodic (Johnson, 2006).
When brought to mind (revived) moments, weeks, months, or even years later, it is these
types of details (or some subset of such details) that provide evidence about the source of a
mental experience. Thus, the concept of source memory subsumes, and is more general than,
what is commonly thought of as a memory’s context. It is important to note that the SMF
does not assume there is anything inherently special about “items” or “content” as compared
to features that might be labeled “context” (see, e.g., Chalfonte & Johnson, 1996 for further
discussion). Often, in laboratory studies, the semantic concept referred to by an item is
designated as the content and some other feature of the event (e.g., location) is designated as
context, but these roles could be reversed for a given task (Glisky & Kong, 2008). For
example, in picking out a new TV, the semantics of the program on the screen could be
incidental (contextual) to the color contrast of different TV models or to the location of the
store where you saw the one you liked best (content).
According to the SMF, mental experiences are attributed to source categories such as
perception, memory, dreaming, imagination, belief, etc., and to more specific sources (e.g.,
“Joe said it”; “it was a blue word on the list”; “it happened yesterday”), according to our
assumptions about average differences in the features that characterize sources (e.g., more
Page 3

affective information for actually experienced events, more cognitive operations for
imagined events, Joe’s voice has a deeper tone than Mary’s voice). Mental experiences vary
on continua of clarity or strength. Specific details (e.g., color, sound, feelings) tend to be
characterized as varying in vividness, a concept that typically encompasses both how intense
or clear and how rich or embellished mental experiences are. If information is less
differentiated it may give rise to more vague subjective experiences – a feeling of
familiarity, recency, or fluency. Both specific details and a general sense of familiarity,
recency, and/or fluency can inform a source decision (see also, e.g., Rotello, et al, 2004;
Wixted, 2007).
Johnson and colleagues (Johnson et al., 1993) used the term differentiation to refer to the
idea that as information becomes active it coheres or settles, giving rise to specific
characteristics of memories such as perceptual, affective, or contextual details. Information
is proposed to be relatively undifferentiated at low levels of cohesion, or if only a single
feature is activated, no matter how strongly activated. That is, differentiation is greater when
two or more features collectively form the basis of segregating one event from another. But,
active information (including a single feature) that does not cohere into fully formed
representations can nevertheless affect perception and thought (e.g., masked priming,
Higgins & Johnson, 2008; Marcel, 1983). In short, some source attributions are relatively
non-specific (“Something about this situation is familiar from somewhere or sometime
before”; “I’ve seen this word in the experiment”); usually such attributions are based
primarily on relatively undifferentiated information (familiarity, fluency, recency). Others
are based on relatively more differentiated information that includes two or more bound
specific details (“I remember the word chair was blue“; “I remember that I was angry with
Chuck yesterday”). Often, less differentiated information is available more quickly than
more differentiated information (Gronlund, Edwards, & Ohrt, 1997; Hintzman, Caulton, &
Levitin, 1998; Johnson, Kounios, & Reeder, 1994; McElree, Dolan, & Jacoby, 1999).
Source attributions also may involve retrieving additional information, discovering and
noting relations, extended reasoning, and so on (Johnson & Raye, 1981; see also,
Moscovitch, 1992; Ross, 1997). Such decisions (e.g., “It must have been Julie because
Natalie was out of town”) presumably are slower and more controlled. Although the
correlation is not perfect, undifferentiated information tends to be processed heuristically
and more specific features tend to require relatively more systematic processing. But,
according to the SMF, exactly which processes are involved and the specificity of the
information they work on are influenced by context. For example, the absence (or presence)
of a specific type of feature might be used heuristically in a given situation (e.g., the
distinctiveness heuristic, Schacter, Israel, & Racine, 1999). In addition, even ostensibly the
same kind of source decision (e.g., Who said it?) can rely on features that are relatively more
or less differentiated under different circumstances. In determining which of four speakers
made a statement, for example, one might correctly identify the specific speaker or only
whether the speaker was male or female (Dodson, Holland, & Shimamura, 1998). Thus,
heuristic and systematic are not fixed concepts but rather relative terms for characterizing
the complexity of reflective processes involved in a given task–a rough placeholder awaiting
more specific characterizations of component cognitive processes (Johnson, 1992).
Both encoding and remembering are constructive and reconstructive; they are selective and
influenced by a rememberer's knowledge, beliefs, biases, goals, agendas, and meta-memory
assumptions active at the time. Source monitoring processes capitalize on characteristic
differences in the kinds and amounts of information generally associated with different types
of events using flexible criteria that can vary across situations. Individual features typically
are combined to make a source decision (Johnson & Raye, 1981; see, e.g., Banks, 2000 for a
model instantiating such an idea), and a key feature of the SMF is the idea that the features
Page 4

are flexibly weighted according to the current task agenda (e.g., context, goals). This
weighting can determine what information is sought and revived and/or how it is combined
and evaluated during the attribution process. For example, given identical encoding, later
asking “did you generate this item” would lead to an emphasis (heavier weighting) on
cognitive operations information, whereas asking “did you read this item” would be
expected to emphasize perceptual information in making a source attribution (Marsh &
Hicks, 1998). An agenda also can influence how vivid you require the information to be
(Johnson & Raye, 2000). You would likely require less specific detail to attribute a
comment to someone if you are reminiscing with friends vs testifying in court, or, you may
have more confidence in a fairly vague recollection when attributing an action to something
a colleague did at a conference last year vs something that happened yesterday.
These tenets of weighting and flexible criteria have implications for making inferences
about the nature of behavioral performance, and brain activity, in laboratory tasks (e.g.,
which condition has a higher monitoring demand). Take the case of old-new decisions.
Whereas relatively undifferentiated fluency or familiarity alone might be used to make a
relatively heuristic old-new decision on a standard recognition task, an old-new decision
may involve more systematic evaluation of specific information when made in the context of
a task that also includes a subsequent confidence, remember/know, or source decision,
because such tasks focus people on specific source details (Lindsay & Johnson, 1989;
Mather, Henkel, & Johnson, 1997; Zaragoza & Koshmider, 1989). In such situations,
specific source information may be monitored (e.g., revived, evaluated) even though it
ostensibly is not required by the old-new task, per se.
It should be clear from the discussion thus far that episodic memory and source memory are
not fundamentally different classes of memory at a conceptual level (see Johnson, 2005 for
further discussion). We take as episodic memories those mental experiences for which we
have encoded, bound, revived, and evaluated features that induce (and sometimes seduce) us
to attribute the source of the experience as a unique event that occurred in our personal past
(if only the moment before). An explication of episodic memory involves understanding the
repertoire of cognitive processes and features involved in source memory, none of which
should be presumed to be unique to a particular memory task (Johnson, 2005). In other
words, although some source identification tasks ask people to explicitly identify the
“source” of information (e.g., “Was this item on the left or the right?” “Did you see this
information in the video or in the postevent questions?”), many other tasks tap source
memory processes, as well. Such procedures include remember/know; context, relational, or
associative memory tests; memory binding tasks; inclusion/exclusion tasks (e.g., process
dissociation procedure, Jacoby, 1991; Kelley & Jacoby, 2000); criterial recollection tasks,
which encourage participants to base their memory judgment on whether or not a certain
(criterial) feature is remembered (e.g., “say yes only if you recollect a corresponding red
word”; Gallo, Weiss, & Schacter, 2004); list discrimination; cryptomnesia (unconscious
plagiarism) tasks; differentiating between presented and non-presented semantically related
items (e.g., the Deese-Roediger-McDermott [DRM] procedure; Deese, 1959; Roediger &
McDermott, 1995); and so on. Of course, recognition and recall tasks require identifying
information from a particular source (e.g., the information presented by the experimenter);
false positives and intrusions from associations, inferences, items from another list, and so
on, reflect failures in source monitoring. Furthermore, free-recall can be coded for the
various featural details associated with the memory, or clustering analyses may reveal that a
specific feature such as voice of speaker was used systematically to recall items.
The SMF assumes that the pool of underlying processes across all of these episodic memory
tasks is basically the same (Johnson, 1992), and what differs is the extent to which any one
or more processes are engaged in a given task, and the precise features or other information
Page 5

(e.g., knowledge, beliefs) involved under a specific set of conditions (see, Dewhurst,
Holmes, Brandt, & Dean, 2006 for a similar view applied to Remember/Know decisions).
Thus, although neural activity should differ in some respects between specific episodic
memory tasks (e.g., associative recognition memory vs free-recall, Staresina & Davachi,
2006), we would also expect much overlap in underlying processes (Steffens, Buchner,
Martensen, & Erdfelder, 2000; Yu & Bellezza, 2000), and presumably then, also much
overlap in the brain areas involved. One goal of both cognitive behavioral and cognitive
neuroimaging studies is to identify the processes and features active under various
conditions; neuroimaging studies further provide information about related brain correlates.
The Source Monitoring Framework vs Dual-Process Models
A complete review of dual-process models is beyond the scope of this paper, but, because
such models are influential in both cognitive behavioral and neuroimaging studies of source
memory (see, e.g., Eichenbaum, et al., 2007; Skinner & Fernandes, 2007; Vilberg & Rugg,
2008; Wais, 2008; Wixted, 2007; for reviews), specifying how they contrast with the SMF
deserves special note. Generally-speaking, most dual-process models argue that more
specific and less differentiated information arise from, respectively, recollection and
familiarity processes (Jacoby, 1991), or correspond to the subjective experiences of
remembering and knowing (see Gardiner, 2008; Gardiner & Richardson-Klavehn, 2000, for
reviews of behavioral Remember/Know studies). These approaches have been very
generative, prompting informative studies such as those demonstrating a disproportionate
disruption in Remember responses in older adults (Jacoby, Bishara, Hessels, & Toth, 2005;
Jennings & Jacoby, 1997) and amnesics (Quamme, Yonelinas, & Norman, 2007; see,
Kensinger & Corkin, 2008 for a review; but see, Squire & Shrager, 2008 for a discussion of
contrary evidence), and differential brain activity presumed to be associated with
recollection and familiarity (see, e.g., Eichenbaum, et al., 2007; Skinner & Fernandes, 2007;
Vilberg & Rugg, 2008, for reviews).
The SMF uses the terms recollection and familiarity to refer to types of subjective
experience rather than as labels for two distinct processes that give rise to those experiences,
and assumes that recollection, like familiarity, is graded. The assumption of graded
recollection is supported by behavioral evidence from subjective ratings of memory features
(e.g., Memory Characteristic Questionnaires [MCQ], Johnson, Foley, Suengas, & Raye,
1988), as well as behavioral (Dodson et al., 1998; Qin, Raye, Johnson, & Mitchell, 2001;
Simons, Dodson, Bell, & Schacter, 2004; Starns, Hicks, Brown, & Martin, 2008; Wais,
Mickes, & Wixted, 2008) and neuroimaging (Eldridge, Engel, Zeineh, Bookheimer, &
Knowlton, 2005; Maril, Simons, Weaver, & Schacter, 2005; Vilberg & Rugg, 2007) studies
showing graded recollection and use of partial source information. Some theorists
accommodate such findings by applying a signal-detection approach and proposing that
familiarity and recollection both contribute to a memory’s “strength” 1 (e.g., Wixted, 2007).
Such models share with the SMF a recognition that both more and less specific information
can jointly influence a memory judgment, and that the resulting memorial “evidence" often
is experienced as continuous.
Arguably the most popular dual-process model used in the neuroimaging domain
characterizes recollection as a threshold process (all-or-none, Yonelinas, 1994) and
familiarity as a continuous, graded process that can vary by degrees (see, e.g., Yonelinas,
1From this perspective, memory strength is orthogonal to recollection/familiarity (e.g., you can have a very strong feeling of
familiarity) and results that are usually argued by high-threshold dual process models to dissociate recollection and familiarity might
sometimes be better explained as reflecting strong vs weak memories, respectively. As discussed in the section on the medial temporal
lobes (MTL), such ideas have implications for interpreting fMRI findings purportedly dissociating the roles of various regions of MTL
in different aspects of memory (see, e.g., Squire, Wixted, & Clark, 207; Wais, in press; Wixted, 2007, for further discussion).
Page 6

1999; Yonelinas, 2002). Proponents of this high-threshold dual-process approach recently
clarified a common misinterpretation of the phrase all-or-none by emphasizing that it refers
to the idea that one can either recollect or not at any given time (that is, recollection can
succeed or fail), and not necessarily that one will remember all features of a memory or none
at all (Parks & Yonelinas, 2007, p. 189). Hence, even the high-threshold dual-process
approach concurs with the SMF that “recollection can be graded” (Parks & Yonelinas, 2007,
p. 190). Nevertheless, the dual-process approach generally has largely focused on cases
where recollection succeeds or fails, for example, emphasizing differences between
recollection and familiarity in the shapes of the resulting receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) curves.
Source memory studies examining the shape of ROC curves report contradictory findings on
this point (see, Wixted, 2007; Yonelinas & Parks, 2007, for reviews). Some studies show
recollection is fit by a threshold model (with linear ROCs) and familiarity by a continuous
model (with curvilinear ROCs) (Yonelinas, 1999, 2002), and other studies show that a
continuous model fits both recollection and familiarity (Glanzer et al., 2004; Hilford,
Glanzer, Kim, & DeCarlo, 2002; Qin et al., 2001; Slotnick et al., 2000). These
contradictions likely can be reconciled by considering the complexity and similarity of the
events studied. For example, Elfman et al. (2008) reported simulations consistent with a
neurobiologically-based computational model (Complementary Learning Systems [CLS],
Norman & O’Reilly, 2003) that predicts recollection will fit a threshold model when sources
are very distinct and a continuous model when there is similarity (feature overlap) in
sources.
Dual process approaches continue to differ from the SMF in another important way, and that
is with respect to “false memories”. As discussed above, the SMF builds on a constructive/
reconstructive view of memory. This view emphasizes that our interpretations of, and
memories for, events are infused with our knowledge, beliefs, desires, as well as products of
our imagination (Bartlett, 1932; Bransford & Johnson, 1973; Loftus, 1979; Neisser, 1981).
In addition, both our interpretations and our memories are influenced by similarities between
events, which can result in the importation of information from other representations
(Henkel, Franklin, & Johnson, 2000; Lampinen, Meier, Arnal, & Leding, 2005; Lyle &
Johnson, 2006). The SMF thus assumes that true and false memories can be accounted for
using the same general principles of memory (Johnson & Raye, 1981, 2000; Lindsay, 2008;
Lindsay & Read, 1994; Lyle & Johnson, 2007; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000), and we should
thus expect similar brain mechanisms to be at play. From this perspective, the phenomenal
experience of remembering, or recollecting, an event does not guarantee that such memories
are veridical.
Dual-process theories, on the other hand, historically have accounted for false memories
only as resulting from misattribution of familiarity (i.e., familiarity responses not corrected
by recollection). False memories reported with high confidence, recollection, or remember
responses (see, e.g., Lindsay, 2008; Marsh, Eslick, & Fazio, 2008, for reviews), for example
to new items, have been assumed by some dual-process theorists to be situations in which
participants simply were not following task instructions properly (e.g., Yonelinas & Parks,
2007, p. 194). Correct old item recognition accompanied by an incorrect source attribution is
sometimes argued, from the dual-process perspective, to signal that the memory decision is
based on familiarity (e.g., Kirwan, Wixted, & Squire, 2008; Wais, Squire, & Wixted, 2008).
From the SMF view, on the other hand, such responses signal that participants sometimes
use specific source information that is self-generated (Durso & Johnson, 1980; Gonsalves,
Reber, Gitelman, Parrish, Mesulam, & Paller, 2004), or imported from other items (Henkel
et al., 2000; Lyle & Johnson, 2006), or prior knowledge (e.g., Deese, 1959; Johnson,
Bransford, & Solomon, 1973) in making their decisions. Such differences in the theoretical
Page 7

assumptions of the SMF vs dual-process approaches regarding false memories have
implications for interpreting brain activity associated with such responses (see, e.g., Medial
Temporal Lobes section below).
In short, some of the apparent theoretical differences that have been noted between some
dual-process models and the SMF arose to a large extent from the dichotomous approach of
the former that looks to distinguish familiarity from recollection and the focus of the latter
on explicating the characteristics of true and false recollection. Both approaches have been
productive in guiding neuroimaging investigations of source memory, but each has unique
implications for interpreting brain activity associated with various aspects of source
memory.
BRAIN REGIONS INVOLVED IN SOURCE MEMORY
Medial Temporal Lobes
This section discusses the memorial roles of regions of the medial temporal lobes (MTL),
long known to be associated with episodic memory The MTL are composed of the
hippocampal formation (dentate gyrus, hippocampus proper [including the CA fields],
subicular complex, entorhinal cortex), as well as the perirhinal and parahippocampal
cortices. A later section on emotion and source memory will discuss the amygdala, also part
of the MTL. Although refinements in anatomical (Kirwan, Jones, Miller, & Stark, 2007;
Kirwan & Stark, 2007; see Squire et al., 2004 for a review and discussion) and functional
(see, Davachi, 2006; Diana et al., 2007; Eichenbaum et al., 2007; Mayes et al., 2007 for
reviews) specificity of MTL regions are major goals of current neuroimaging work, the
spatial resolution of most fMRI studies does not allow differentiating between all of the
MTL structures likely important for episodic memory (e.g. the CA fields). Figure 1 shows
the areas most commonly identified in episodic memory fMRI studies to date.
Especially important to source memory are processes that bind together (associate, relate,
organize) features, or clusters of features, that co-occur physically or cognitively during
encoding, revival, and/or evaluation of memories (Chalfonte & Johnson, 1996; Mitchell,
Johnson, Raye, & D’Esposito, 2000; Mitchell, Johnson, Raye, Mather, & D’Esposito, 2000;
Naveh-Benjamin, 2000; see also, Johnson & Chalfonte, 1994). Regions within the MTL
have been of particular interest to episodic memory researchers because of extensive animal
(Brasted, Bussey, Murray, & Wise, 2003; Bunsey & Eichenbaum, 1996) and patient (Gold
et al., 2006; Hannula, Tranel, & Cohen, 2006; Kroll, Knight, Metcalfe, Wolf, & Tulving,
1996; Myers et al., 2003; Olson, Page, Moore, Chatterjee, & Verfaellie, 2006; Reinitz,
Verfaellie, & Milberg, 1996; Squire & Knowlton, 1995) literatures indicating that these
regions are involved in memory binding, and associative or relational remembering (see,
Aggleton & Brown, 1999; Burgess, Maguire, & O’Keefe, 2002; Cohen & Eichenbaum,
1993; Eichenbaum et al., 2007; Eichenbaum et al., 2008; Kensinger & Corkin, 2008; Squire
& Zola-Morgan, 1991, for reviews). Furthermore, there is evidence that amnesics with
hippocampal damage show greater deficits in source than item memory (Giovanello,
Verfaellie, & Keane, 2003; Yonelinas et al., 2002; see, Mayes, Montaldi, & Migo, 2007 for
a review), though this remains controversial (Gold, Hopkins, & Squire, 2006; Stark, Bayley,
& Squire, 2002; Stark & Squire, 2003).
Early neuroimaging studies highlighted the role of the hippocampus in relational memory.
An early review, largely of PET studies, suggested an anterior-posterior gradient, such that
more anterior portions of the hippocampus were proposed to be involved in relational
encoding and more posterior regions in retrieval and/or flexible use of relational information
during later remembering (Lepage, Habib, & Tulving, 1998). More recent reviews of
accumulated fMRI studies, however, failed to find a strong anterior-posterior pattern with
Page 8

respect to encoding/retrieval (see, Diana, Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2007; Henson, 2005;
Schacter & Wagner, 1999; Squire, Stark, & Clark, 2004; Squire, Wixted, & Clark, 2007;
Wais, 2008).
Although possible functional dissociations within the hippocampus itself remains a topic of
vigorous empirical investigation (e.g., Giovanello, Schnyder, & Verfaellie, 2009; see also,
Kumaran & Maguire, 2009 for a discussion), much of the recent empirical and theoretical
work in the neuroimaging of human episodic memory has centered on identifying the
relative contributions of the various regions of MTL. Most of these studies have contrasted
activity associated with familiarity or novelty on the one hand and recollection or source
memory on the other. There have been several recent reviews (e.g., Davachi, 2006; Diana et
al., 2007; Eichenbaum et al., 2007; Henson, 2005; Mayes et al., 2007; Skinner & Fernandes,
2007; Squire et al., 2007; Wais, 2008); thus, here we highlight converging conclusions,
points of controversy, and puzzles for further investigation.
Activity in the hippocampus frequently is greater during encoding and test for items given
Remember responses than those given Know responses or for items whose source is
correctly identified than those whose source is incorrectly identified (see, e.g., Davachi,
2006; Diana et al., 2007; Henson, 2005; Mayes et al., 2007; Skinner & Fernandes, 2007, for
reviews). Such findings support the idea that the hippocampus is involved in binding
features into complex episodic memories during encoding, and in remembering item
+context information, and this fundamental idea is emphasized in any discussion of
hippocampal function (see Figure 2; but see Squire et al., 2004, for a review and arguments
against an associative vs non-associative division of labor for MTL regions; see also,
Kensinger & Corkin, 2008; Squire et al., 2007 for further discussion of this debate). Mayes
et al. (2007) propose that the hippocampus is needed for across-domain associations (e.g.,
scene-sound; face-voice) because such information does not converge before the
hippocampus. (See also the distinction between relational vs configural [or unitized]
representations, argued to rely on hippocampus and surrounding MTL cortex, respectively,
Eichenbaum, 1994). One possibility that would be consistent with the data cited above, as
well as the established role of the hippocampus in both allocentric spatial cognition and
temporal memory (and imagery) is that the hippocampus is involved (perhaps in conjunction
with entorhinal cortex [Lipton & Eichenbaum, 2008], or midbrain structures [Shohamy &
Wagner, 2008]) whenever information is bound, associated, or integrated, across time or
space (see, Bird & Burgess, 2008; Burgess et al., 2002; Nadel & Hardt, 2004; for reviews
and related discussions). That is, the hippocampus may be especially important for binding
and later remembering information that is not initially strictly contiguous (Johnson &
Chalfonte, 1994).
Perirhinal cortex typically is not seen in the same fMRI contrasts that produce hippocampal
activity and is often more active for incorrect source items than misses. Based on this and
other evidence, investigators have proposed that perirhinal cortex supports item memory
(Davachi, 2006), including memory for feature-complexes that are “unitized” (Diana,
Yonelinas, & Ranganath, 2008; Haskins, Yonelinas, Quamme, & Ranganath, 2008; Preston
& Gabrieli, 2008; see, e.g., Diana et al., 2007; Mayes et al., 2007 for reviews and
discussion). Mayes et al. (2007) propose that perirhinal cortex supports memory for
associations of features within the same domain (e.g., word-word or face-face pairs) because
activity for different items within the same domain converges within perirhinal cortex and
thus can be bound there.
Generally, the conditions and/or contrasts producing activity in parahippocampal cortex
(e.g., Remember > Know; source correct > source incorrect) are more similar to those
producing activity in hippocampus than in perirhinal cortex. Whereas Davachi (2006)
Page 9

suggests that parahippocampal activity primarily reflects processing of spatial context,
Diana et al (2007) propose that parahippocampal activity is engaged for contextual
information more generally (see also, Bar, Aminoff, & Schacter, 2008), and Mayes et al.
(2007) note that the function(s) of parahippocampus remain to be determined.
How to map the functional specificity of MTL regions with respect to familiarity and
recollection is also a topic of active theorizing and empirical investigation. Diana et al.,
(2007) and Mayes et al. (2007) suggest that activity in perirhinal cortex reflects familiarity
processes and activity in hippocampus reflects recollection processes (see also, e.g.,
Eichenbaum et al., 2007). However, perirhinal activity sometimes is associated with
remeber responses when the information to be recollected is item information (e.g., which
object was paired with a scene, Awipi & Davachi, 2008). As Diana et al. suggest,
hippocampus may always be activated for recollection of inter-item associations. If study
context is retrieved (even if incidentally), parahippocampal cortex may also be activated,
and, moreover, if one test item prompts revival of an associated item (whether or not it is
required by the test), perirhinal cortex also may be involved. This characterization highlights
the difficulty of mapping the functional specificity of regions of MTL using global
processing concepts such as recollection and familiarity. Rather, theorizing and empirical
studies from a number of labs are converging on the idea that it may be more productive to
examine which brain areas are associated with memory for which specific features, and
combinations of features, and under what circumstances (e.g., what kinds of schemas or
mediators have been used to connect features) than to look for brain regions that invariably
signal recollection or familiarity (see also Squire et al. 2007, p. 881). For example, there is
recent evidence associating perirhinal/entorhinal cortex activity at test with visual but not
auditory source memory and parahippocampal cortex with auditory but not visual source
memory (Peters, Suchan, Köster, & Daum, 2007; see also, Peters, Koch, Schwarz, & Daum,
2007 for converging evidence from a lesion study). Further replication and extensions under
a broader range of conditions, and with other features, will be necessary before any strong
conclusions can be drawn.
A more content or feature-based approach perhaps would help resolve another controversy.
Squire and colleagues (2007; also Squire, 2004; Wais, 2008; Wixted, 2007) argue that
differences between activity in hippocampus and perirhinal cortex that are usually ascribed
to recollection and familiarity processes confound memory strength with the basis for that
strength (e.g., the experience of recollection or familiarity). To test this idea, Wais, Squire,
and Wixted (2008) compared fMRI activity associated with correct and incorrect source
judgments for items that were hits on an old-new recognition test that had high confidence
ratings and found equal hippocampal activity (relative to old items called new [misses]).
They suggested that previous studies failed to find hippocampal activity for incorrect source
judgments (assumed to reflect familiarity) because they included low confidence old-new
judgments (i.e., weak items).
One problem in trying to resolve the controversy regarding how/whether regions of MTL
map onto familiarity and recollection processes is that a common assumption is
questionable: that incorrect source judgments reflect familiarity. In particular, some
investigators assume that an old item correctly recognized with high confidence at stage one
and given an incorrect source attribution at stage two is based on a strong familiarity
response (e.g., Kirwan et al., 2008). As previously discussed, however, from the SMF
perspective, another viable possibility is that high confidence old responses are sometimes
based on recollected (but sometimes erroneous or irrelevant) information. Kirwan et al. (p.
6) note this possibility and dismiss it as untestable, but one could test old-new recognition
and source memory in separate runs (or sessions) to minimize the use of source information
on item recognition trials, leading to cleaner interpretations of brain activity with respect to
Page 10

the basis for memory attributions (e.g., Ranganath, Johnson, & D’Esposito, 2000; Raye,
Johnson, Mitchell, Nolde, & D’Esposito, 2000; see also Mayes et al., 2007, Box 2). In any
event, it is notable that Wais, Squire, and Wixted (2008) found that high confidence source
incorrect items showed activity in perirhinal cortex, and suggested that if one assumes that
such items reflect false recollection, this activity argues against the idea that perirhinal
cortex reflects familiarity and not recollection.
Mapping functions to various MTL regions is further complicated by the fact that, during
retrieval, the change in fMRI signal in the hippocampus and perirhinal cortex tend to go in
opposite directions as a function of memory strength: hippocampal activity tends to increase
whereas perirhinal activity tends to decrease with memory strength, both in a non-linear
fashion (see, e.g., Squire et al., 2007 for a review and discussion). The extent to which this
dissociation signals selective sensitivity to, or a preference for, familiar vs novel
information, or rather reflects something related to the subjective memorial experiences
associated with recollection vs familiarity is a topic of ongoing debate (see, e.g., Diana et al.,
2007; Eichenbaum et al., 2007; Squire et al., 2007).
In short, to draw conclusions about the functional specificity of MTL regions with respect to
recollection and familiairity, the relation between the information that provides the basis of
phenomenal feelings of recollection and of familiarity needs to be better specified.
Systematically comparing types of features and feature combinations would help clarify the
neural activity associated with different types of recollective experience (e.g., of a face, a
word, a color, a place) vs different types of familiarity experience (e.g., of a face, a word, a
color, a place).
Prefrontal Cortex
The areas discussed in this section are illustrated in Figure 3 and Figure 4.
Neuropsychological work shows that lesions in frontal cortex disrupt the kind of self-
initiated processes (Stuss & Benson, 1986) that should promote feature binding (e.g., by
maintaining activation or generating organization or elaborations) and that are likely
engaged during the revival and evaluation of source information (see Shimamura, 1995 for a
review). Frontal damage often results in deficits on source identification tasks (Ciaramelli &
Spaniol, 2008; Duarte, Ranganath, Knight, 2005; Johnson, O’Connor, & Cantor, 1997;
Schacter, Harbluk, & McLachlan, 1984; Shimamura & Squire, 1987; Simons, Verfaellie,
Galton, Miller, Hodges, & Graham, 2002; see, e.g., Duarte, et al., 2005; Ranganath &
Blumenfeld, 2008 for reviews). One of the primary goals of fMRI studies of source memory
has been to identify the functional specificity of prefrontal cortex (PFC).
One early hypothesis followed from the SMF and focused primarily on remembering (as
opposed to encoding). It proposed that right PFC is involved in heuristic evaluation
processes and that left, or bilateral, PFC activity is involved in more systematic processes
(e.g., self cuing, evaluating specific information; Nolde, Johnson, & Raye, 1998; also see
Burgess & Shallice, 1996; Johnson, 1997a,b)2. The results of one of the first studies to use
event-related fMRI to contrast old-new recognition and source memory judgments (Nolde,
Johnson, & D’Esposito, 1998) was consistent with this proposal, finding greater left PFC
activity for source memory than old-new recognition. Since then, a large number of fMRI
2Another model that was influential in early neuroimaging studies of episodic memory was the Hemispheric Encoding/Retrieval
Asymmetry [HERA] model that proposed left PFC is engaged more than right in episodic encoding and right PFC engaged more than
left in episodic retrieval (Tulving, Kapur, Craik, Moscovitch, & Houle, 1994; also Habib, Nyberg, & Tulving, 2003; Shallice,
Fletcher, Frith, Grasby, Frackowiak, & Dolan, 1994). Lepage, Ghaffar, Nyberg, and Tulving (2000) extended HERA by attributing the
function of a core network of PFC areas (right and left BA 10, 47/45, and right BA 8/9) to adopting a general retrieval mode (i.e.,
“set” to remember) that we would expect to operate across various memory tasks.
Page 11

studies have found that source memory judgments, relative to old-new, are associated with
increased activity in left lateral PFC, including superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri
primarily in Brodmann areas (BA) 9, 10, 44, 46, and 47. Left lateral PFC activity associated
with source memory has been found for various types of source information (e.g., location,
size, cognitive operation performed) and for a broad range of materials (e.g., auditory and
visual words, nameable pictures, abstract shapes) (Cansino, Maquet, Dolan, & Rugg, 2002;
Dobbins, Foley, Schacter, & Wagner, 2002; Dobbins & Han, 2006; Dobbins, Rice, Wagner,
& Schacter, 2003; Dobbins & Wagner, 2005; Dudukovic & Wagner, 2007; Henson,
Shallice, & Dolan, 1999; Konishi, Uchida, Okuaki, Machida, Shirouzu, & Miyashita, 2002;
Mitchell, Johnson, Raye, & Greene, 2004; Mitchell, Raye, McGuire, Frankel, & Johnson,
2008; Nolde, Johnson, & D’Esposito, 1998; Ranganath et al., 2000; Raye et al., 2000; Rugg,
Fletcher, Chua, & Dolan, 1999; Simons, Gilbert, Owen, Fletcher, & Burgess, 2005; Simons,
Owen, Fletcher, & Burgess, 2005; Slotnick, Moo, Segal, & Hart, 2003, among others). Right
lateral PFC on the other hand, is involved in heuristic judgments based on less differentiated
information. For example, Dobbins et al. (2003) compared recency judgments (which can be
made based on fluency) and source judgments (encoding task) and found greater right lateral
PFC activity for recency judgments and greater left PFC activity for source judgments (see
also Dobbins & Han, 2006; Kensinger, Clark, & Corkin, 2003; Mitchell et al., 2004; Raye et
al., 2000). Together, these findings support the idea that left and right lateral PFC are
engaged for systematic and heuristic monitoring, respectively. Such monitoring is argued to
involve evaluation of, respectively, more vs less differentiated information (Nolde, Johnson,
& Raye, 1998; see also, e.g., Suzuki et al., 2002).
Two notable alternatives to the systematic/heuristic characterization of left and right PFC
activity during tests of episodic memory have been proposed. The production-monitoring
hypothesis suggested that left PFC is involved in production/generation during memory
retrieval and right PFC is involved in memory monitoring (Cabeza, Locantore, & Anderson,
2003). The heuristic-systematic distinction and the production-monitoring hypothesis both
predict less differentiated information will be monitored by right PFC and both propose that
left PFC is involved in systematic retrieval processes, but these hypotheses differ in that the
SMF proposes that left PFC (or left and right) is engaged in the systematic monitoring/
evaluation of more specific information while the production-monitoring hypothesis predicts
monitoring of all types to be right-based. Rugg and his colleagues have argued, as well, that
monitoring generally is associated with right PFC, and note that whether such activity is
associated with less or more differentiated information (e.g., whether it is related to
familiarity or recollection judgments) depends on which type of information imposes the
greater monitoring demand under the current testing situation (e.g., Rugg, Otten, & Henson,
2002; but see Hayama, Johnson, & Rugg, 2008 for a more recent interpretation suggesting
that right PFC activity is related to more general decision processes rather than post-retrieval
evaluation, per se; see also Dobbins & Han, 2006; Fleck, Daselaar, Dobbins, & Cabeza,
2006 for similar ideas). Rugg and colleagues also acknowledge a role for left lateral PFC
during remembering when the task requires specific contextual features (e.g., Rugg et al.,
1999), but have stopped short of attributing such activity to monitoring the product of
retrieval, noting that the precise function of this activity (e.g., “cue specification” vs
“evaluation”) is unclear (see, e.g., Rugg & Wilding, 2000 for discussion).
Each of the hypotheses discussed thus far has proven influential in helping to guide and
organize early fMRI investigations. As data accumulate, however, it has become apparent
that there is a need for greater specificity with respect to both the component processes that
encoding and remembering draw upon and regions within left and right PFC that subserve
those processes. Evidence to date suggests that anterior prefrontal cortex (aPFC),
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) may
support different aspects of source memory (see Figure 4).
Page 12

For example, based on a review of neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies of episodic
long term memory encoding, Blumenfeld and Ranganath (2007; see also Ranganath &
Blumenfeld, 2008) proposed that ventrolateral PFC is involved in the kinds of control
processes necessary to select and encode the appropriate (i.e., goal-relevant) features of
items. Dorsolateral PFC, on the other hand, is more involved in processes that support the
kinds of elaboration and organization of multiple features necessary for encoding
associations among items. Thus, ventrolateral PFC activity during encoding is more likely to
be associated with later successful item memory and dorsolateral PFC with source memory.
Consistent with this, Starisina and Davachi (2006) showed that whereas activity during
encoding in ventrolateral PFC was associated with both successful associative recognition
and recall, activity in left dorsolateral PFC was selectively associated with successful recall.
Recall is more dependent on elaboration and organization than is recognition (Guerin, &
Miller, 2008; Kintsch, 1968), thus, this pattern of fMRI activity supports the idea that
dorsolateral PFC is involved in such processes during encoding.
A dorso-ventrolateral fractionation has been proposed with respect to remembering, as well.
For example, Petrides proposed that whereas mid-ventrolateral prefrontal cortex involved in
the active retrieval and selection of information (e.g., from posterior regions), mid-
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex is primarily involved in on-line monitoring and manipulation
of information (see, Petrides, 2002 for a review). The activity seen in left PFC during the
many long-term source memory studies cited above includes both these regions. It seems
likely that this is because several component processes are involved in source monitoring.
According to the SMF perspective, monitoring minimally encompasses processes involved
in both the revival (e.g., reactivation, retrieval) and the evaluation (e.g., “Is this information
characteristic of Source A?”) of information, and we would expect these processes to have
different neural correlates. But, assuming revival and evaluation processes are iterative
(Johnson & Raye, 2000), it can be difficult to identify the putative brain regions involved
specifically in each process using long-term memory tasks (see also, Rugg & Wilding,
2000).
To identify PFC regions involved primarily in evaluation, Mitchell et al. (2004) developed a
short-term source memory task to maximize the likelihood that information was still active
in working memory. This should minimize the need for retrieval of information from long-
term memory so that the observed brain activity is relatively more associated with
evaluation. Consistent with predictions from the SMF, similar to long-term memory studies,
there was greater activation in a large region of left lateral PFC, including middle and
inferior frontal gyri (BAs 9, 10, 46, 45), and a smaller region of right, as well, when
participants tried to remember which format (picture vs. word) or location (left vs. right) one
of four items had appeared in than for old-new recognition. These regions of lateral PFC
were equally active in a second experiment when information was tested immediately on a
random half of the trials and after a brief filled delay (up to 36 sec) on the other half,
suggesting that much of the activity seen in left lateral PFC during source memory tasks is
relatively more involved in evaluating active source-relevant information than in retrieval
from long term memory. In a third experiment, substituting recency for location judgments
resulted in an overall shift in task context that produced greater activity in several regions of
right PFC associated with the old-new and recency tasks compared to the format task. Again
there was left source memory-related activity.
Thus, evidence from both long- and short-term source memory studies supports the idea that
the relative contribution of left and right lateral PFC to evaluative processes during source
memory will depend on the nature of the information being evaluated (i.e., more- and less-
differentiated, respectively) and/or the types of processing (i.e., systematic vs heuristic)
required. In addition, given that the areas involved in source evaluation in the short-term
Page 13

studies tended to be relatively more dorsal than ventral (e.g., Mitchell et al., 2004), the
findings also are roughly consistent with the idea (e.g., Petrides, 2002) that left dorsolateral
regions may be relatively more involved in online evaluation of active information, as
opposed to ventrolateral regions, which tend to be relatively more involved in controlled
retrieval and/or selection of relevant information (see also discussion below regarding
findings from Mitchell et al., 2008).
An interesting wrinkle in the general pattern of left-lateralized source memory activity
comes from a long-term memory study reporting activity in several regions of right posterior
ventrolateral and right dorsolateral PFC associated with a size judgment task (Dobbins &
Wagner, 2005). The authors emphasized the role of the right posterior ventrolateral region in
memory tasks that focus participants on perceptual details of test probes and/or that
encourage retrieval of perceptual information, regardless of whether such information is
used for familiarity or recollection based memory judgments. For example, in some
situations such activity may act to bias the gain on perceptual information in order to
differentiate actually-experienced (i.e., old) from novel information, accounting for some of
the right lateral PFC activity found in some source memory studies. For example, Mitchell
et al. (2008) found activity in a short-term source memory task in right lateral PFC regions
similar to those of Dobbins and Wagner (2005) for picture-word source judgments with
word test probes and suggested that these regions are engaged not only when participants
inspect perceptually present details (e.g., of test probes, as in Dobbins & Wagner) but also
when participants reflectively attend to specific perceptual qualities of active mental
representations during source memory tasks. Such interpretations dovetail with earlier fMRI
evidence showing lateralization of PFC activity during episodic memory tasks, especially in
more posterior/inferior regions (e.g., 44/6, 45; see Figure 4), according to materials or
information domains: verbal information associated with left PFC activity and nonverbal
with right (e.g., Kelley et al., 1998; McDermott, Buckner, Petersen, Kelley, & Sanders,
1999; Raye et al., 2000; Wagner, Poldrack, Eldridge, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1998;
see, Buckner & Wheeler, 2001; Wagner, 1999, for reviews).
In considering potential differential sensitivity of specific PFC regions to different types of
information, reflectively- or internally-generated information is especially interesting
because of the importance of being able to identify oneself as a source (e.g., reality
monitoring; Johnson & Raye, 1981; Johnson et al., 1993). Our thoughts, and the processes
by which we generate them, leave records that can be used to identify the origin of
information (Finke, Johnson, & Shyi, 1988). Several long-term memory studies suggest that
left anterior ventrolateral PFC and medial anterior PFC are relatively more active during
monitoring of internally-generated information, such as the task performed during encoding
(e.g., read vs generate) or the conceptual information generated during such tasks, compared
to perceptually-derived information such as stimulus size, position on the screen, or list
membership (Dobbins & Wagner, 2005; Simons, Davis, Gilbert, Frith, & Burgess, 2006;
Simons, Gilbert, et al., 2005; Simons, Owen, et al., 2005). Consistent with the idea that left
anterior ventrolateral PFC is involved in evaluating self-generated information, a short-term
source memory study showed that activity in this area was greater during judgments about
which encoding task was performed than judgments about format (picture vs. word)
(Mitchell et al., 2008). Within medial anterior PFC, long-term memory studies have shown
that the more posterior area may be especially sensitive to self- vs other generated
information (Simons, Henson, Gilbert, & Fletcher, 2008; Turner, Simons, Gilbert, Frith, &
Burgess, 2008; Vinogradov, Luks, Simpson, Schulman, Glenn, & Wong, 2006). One
possibility is that medial anterior PFC is involved in representing information about
cognitive operations (e.g., self-generation) and left ventrolateral PFC is engaged in
evaluating this information. In any event, there do appear to be areas of PFC differentially
involved in remembering perceptually-acquired vs reflectively-generated source features.
Page 14

This should be expected in a system that is capable of not only taking in and synthesizing
information from various external sources, but also of generating its own information, and of
(at least sometimes) telling these two classes of information apart.
Another aspect of source memory emphasized by the SMF is that it is agenda-driven:
Source decisions usually involve “paying attention to” (giving more weight to) some
information while ignoring (or giving less weight to) other information (for behavioral
evidence, see, e.g., Dodson & Schacter, 2001; Lindsay & Johnson, 1989; Marsh & Hicks,
1998; Mather et al., 1997; Rahhal, May, & Hasher, 2002; Zaragoza & Koshmider, 1989; for
neuroimaging evidence, see, e.g., Dobbins & Wagner, 2005; Johnson, Nolde, et al., 1997;
Johnson, Kounios, & Nolde, 1997; Simons, Gilbert, et al., 2005). From this perspective,
remembering usually is not just a matter of a cue reviving information, rather, what
information one finds (i.e., what information is activated) during remembering depends on
what one seeks3, how one evaluates activated information, including setting criteria for its
use (e.g., weighting the importance of features according to the active agenda), and on
attributional decision processes (e.g., comparing activated features to expected features) (see
also, McDuff, Frankel, & Norman, 2008).
Concepts in the neuroimaging domain consistent with the idea of agenda-driven
remembering tend to highlight pre-retrieval control processes—for example, retrieval
orientation (Rugg & Wilding, 2000), domain-sensitive biasing (Dobbins & Wagner, 2005),
or cue-based planning (Dobbins & Han, 2006). These concepts have tended to be used only
in reference to long-term memory retrieval and to emphasize primarily the match between a
test cue and what has been encoded (encoding specificity; Morris, Bransford, & Franks,
1977; Norman & O’Reilly, 2003; Tulving & Thomson, 1973) (see, e.g., Hornberger, Rugg,
& Henson, 2006; Johnson & Rugg, 2007; Otten, 2007; Woodruff, Johnson, Uncapher, &
Rugg, 2005). There is growing evidence from studies examining these kinds of pre-retrieval
processes in the service of source memory that lateral anterior PFC is involved in identifying
and maintaining memory relevant goals, the set to remember, and/or specific source
monitoring agenda(s) (e.g., Dobbins & Han, 2006; Lepage, Ghaffar, Nyberg, & Tulving,
2000; see, Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2008; Simons, in press, for reviews).
Mitchell et al. (2008) found evidence for domain-general cognitive control processes
involved in the monitoring/evaluation of active information. In the short-term source
memory study discussed above, making source memory decisions about encoding task
required evaluating and making attributions about self-generated information while ignoring
(presumably) more salient format information. Areas more active on encoding task trials
than format included: left mid- ventrolateral PFC, which has been associated with selection
of relevant information (Badre, Poldrack, Paré-Blagoev, Insler, & Wagner, 2005;
Thompson-Schill, D'Esposito, Aguirre, & Farah, 1997; see also Petrides, 2002), left
dorsolateral PFC, associated with foregrounding (refreshing) a target representation
(Dobbins & Han, 2006; Raye, Johnson, Mitchell, Greene, & Johnson, 2007), and anterior
cingulate cortex, involved in detecting conflict among active representations (Botvinick,
Cohen, & Carter, 2004). Thus, Mitchell et al. suggested that, whereas left anterior
ventrolateral PFC is involved in evaluating self-generated information, left mid-ventrolateral
and dorsolateral PFC activity may be more domain general and, with ACC, involved in
selecting relevant features, foregrounding information, and resolving conflict (e.g., from
salient but irrelevant active information). Of course, none of these processes need be unique
to source memory.
3Related concepts from the cognitive behavioral literature are cue specification (Burgess & Shallice, 1996) and early selection
(Jacoby et al., 2005).
Page 15

In sum, there is growing consensus that PFC can be functionally fractionated with respect to
both the processes and the features involved in source memory (Dobbins & Wagner, 2005;
McDermott et al., 1999; see Figure 4). For example, during encoding, ventrolateral PFC
tends to be more involved in attention to/encoding of specific item features, which may
enhance item memory, whereas dorsolateral PFC tends to be more involved in control
processes necessary for organization and relating of multiple features, which should
contribute to source memory. With respect to remembering, comparisons of source vs item
memory judgments show that whereas left lateral PFC is primarily involved in systematic
monitoring of specific information (as during source identification tasks), right lateral PFC
is involved in heuristic evaluation of less-differentiated information such as familiarity or
recency (as in item recognition). Studies that directly compare activity associated with two
source identification tasks suggest that whereas dorsolateral and lateral anterior PFC tend to
support domain-general processes engaged during source memory, ventrolateral PFC may
be relatively more involved in feature-specific processing. Recent evidence also suggests
that there likely are intricate interactions between features and processes, with the functional
connectivity between PFC and posterior regions dynamically adjusting to the current context
—i.e., specific process-feature combinations (e.g., Protzner & McIntosh, 2008).
Together, findings such as those presented above have encouraged researchers to further
refine and specify ideas about the component processes, and the features, involved in source
memory under different conditions. Additional systematic investigation is needed before we
have a full understanding of PFC specificity with respect to source memory. This
understanding will be furthered by investigations looking at how subregions of PFC interact
with subregions of MTL or parietal cortex and other regions (see next section) during both
encoding and remembering of specific features and combinations of features. Progress also
likely will be made as investigators find novel ways to conduct cross-technique studies, such
as direct comparisons of TMS and fMRI to examine causal relationships, or that use ERP to
examine the timecourse of PFC activity associated with component processes as identified
with fMRI.
Parietal Cortex and Other Posterior Brain Regions
Source memory accuracy is related to what specific features of an experience are encoded,
how well those features are bound together in memory, and how they are accessed and
evaluated during remembering. There is evidence for category specificity in posterior visual
areas in episodic memory. For example, different areas of fusiform cortex are differentially
involved in encoding various types of materials (e.g., faces [Kuskowski & Pardo, 1999],
scenes [Kirchhoff, Wagner, Maril, & Stern, 2000], words [Wagner, et al., 1998]), and these
regions are the same as those involved in perception of the corresponding types of
information (e.g., fusiform face area [FFA], Kanwisher, McDermott, & Chun, 1997; Puce,
Allison, Gore, & McCarthy, 1995; parahippocampal place area [PPA], Epstein &
Kanwisher, 1998; visual word form area in left occipito-temporal sulcus [bordering the
fusiform gyrus], McCandliss, Cohen, & Dehaene, 2003). In addition, activity in left superior
temporal gyrus and retrosplenial/posterior cingulate cortex has been associated with
successful encoding of location, and posterior inferior temporal cortex with encoding color
source information (Uncapher, Otten, & Rugg, 2006). For visual stimuli, there is some
evidence that encoding activity in right fusiform predicts accurate source memory for
specific perceptual details and activity in left fusiform predicts accuracy of judgments that
can be based on less-specific information (e.g., old-new recognition; Garoff, Slotnick, &
Schacter, 2005; see also Simons, Koutstaal, Prince, Wagner, & Schacter, 2003). The precise
functional significance of the left fusiform activity for memory is still unclear, but, Simons
et al. (2003) have suggested that left fusiform could be involved in processing semantic
Page 16

information. Findings such as these are consistent with the SMF, in that patterns of posterior
brain activity should reflect various specific characteristics of memories.
There also is evidence consistent with the idea that activity in posterior representational
areas during encoding is modulated by top-down PFC processes, and that this modulation
supports later source memory. For example, a study looking at functional connectivity
among regions active during the encoding of face-house pairs found that correlations
between face- and place-sensitive voxels in posterior regions and the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex were related to successful face–house binding (Summerfield et al., 2006).
In contrast to the relatively content-specific activity of some posterior regions, parietal
cortex may be more generally involved in encoding and remembering source information.
For example, in contrast to the activation associated with successfully encoded individual
features (location, color) in the Uncapher et al. (2006) study noted above, activity in
intraparietal sulcus (as well as precuneus, another region of parietal cortex) was associated
with successful encoding of both source features. In interpreting their results, Uncapher et
al. argued that the encoding of multifeatural representations, as opposed to single feature
representations, requires initial perceptual binding of the features, which relies on
intraparietal sulcus. This interpretation is consistent with behavioral modeling studies
suggesting that source judgments of two features tend to be stochastically dependent (Meiser
& Broder, 2002; Starns & Hicks, 2005).
With respect to remembering, both long-term (Dobbins et al., 2002; Dobbins & Wagner,
2005; Kahn, Davachi, & Wagner, 2004; Simons, Gilbert, et al., 2005; Simons, Owen, et al.,
2005; see also, Wagner, Shannon, Kahn, & Buckner, 2005), and short-term (Mitchell et al.,
2008), source memory studies suggest that activity in parietal cortex (especially inferior and
lateral posterior areas) differs depending on the specificity of the information being
evaluated. For example, Wheeler and Buckner (2004) showed participants words that were
paired at encoding with either a related picture or a related sound and reported that during a
long-term recognition memory test for the words, activity in an area of left parietal cortex
near the intraparietal sulcus was associated with both Remember and Know responses, but
two other parietal areas, one more lateral and one more posterior, were more active for
Remember than Know responses. Vilberg and Rugg (2007) found that activity in a posterior
parietal area similar to Wheeler and Buckner’s posterior one showing Remember > Know
was associated with the amount of specific information recollected (participants remembered
a test picture and the picture that was associated with it at study vs. they remembered a test
picture but not the picture paired with it at study; see also Okado & Stark, 2003).
Other studies have shown greater activity in parietal cortex (inferior and superior parietal
lobules, precuneus) and in posterior cingulate and retrosplenial cortex for hits vs. correct
rejections (Wagner et al., 2005). Wagner et al. concluded that several posterior and inferior
parietal areas lateral of the intraparietal sulcus, precuneus, and to a lesser extent superior
parietal areas, are associated with recollective experience, including amount recollected, but
that intraparietal sulcus activity appears more related to familiarity4. More recently, Vilberg
and Rugg (2008) concluded from a meta-analysis of fMRI studies involving Remember/
Know judgments, that superior parietal cortex, especially in and around intraparietal sulcus,
does not seem to be involved in processes directly related to feelings of familiarity or
recollection (e.g., the strength of a memory, nature of details), but rather is involved in some
(unspecified) processes that respond whenever a stimulus is task relevant (i.e., salient; see
4It is interesting that Uncapher et al. (2006) saw both hippocampus and intraparietal sulcus activity associated with successful
encoding of both features. Whether this joint activity at encoding results in the kinds of unitized representations discussed by Diana et
al. (2007) as leading to a familiarity response at test is an interesting question.
Page 17

also discussion below of attentional accounts; but see, Vilberg & Rugg, in press). They also
argue that inferior parietal cortex appears to be more directly involved in recollection, and
they suggest it may correspond to the episodic buffer theorized by Baddeley (2000). In any
event, as Wagner et al. noted, lateral parietal, retrosplenial, and posterior cingulate cortices
are connected directly or indirectly to the MTL (see also, Cabeza, Ciaramelli, Olson, &
Moscovitch, 2008; Kahn, Andrews-Hanna, Vincent, Snyder, & Buckner, 2008; Olson &
Berryhill, in press, for further evidence and discussion of parietal cortex’s neuroanotomical
and functional connections). Thus, it is reasonable that all of these regions have important
functions in source memory.
Based on comparisons between fMRI activation in control participants and lesion patient
data, Simons and colleagues (Simons, Peers, et al., 2008) have suggested that although
parietal cortex may often be active in source memory tasks, it might not be necessary for
source accuracy. Consistent with this, Simons, Peers, Mazuz, Berryhill, and Olson (2009)
found that patients with bilateral parietal lesions were not less accurate than controls on a
source memory task (e.g., whether the speaker of a sentence was male or female; which of
two judgments about a picture the participant made), but they were less confident in their
source judgments. Importantly, they did not differ from controls in old/new recognition or
their confidence in their old/new judgments. Interestingly, these same bilateral patients also
reported less detail in their autobiographical memories (Berryhill, Phuong, Picasso, Cabeza,
& Olson, 2007). Together, these findings are consistent with the idea that confidence is
related to the subjective qualities of memories (see also, e.g., Lyle & Johnson, 2006, 2007),
and they add to a growing body of evidence suggesting that parietal cortex plays an
important role in representing, or directing reflective attention to, source features that give
memories their episodic character.
It seems likely that reflective attention during monitoring of specific source features requires
coordinated activity between lateral parietal (and other posterior regions) and prefrontal
cortices. This hypothesis is consistent not only with the long-term source monitoring
findings just reviewed, but also with evidence that regions of activity in both left
dorsolateral PFC and lateral parietal cortex in short-term source memory tasks (Mitchell et
al., 2008) overlap with regions active in a working memory task in which people refresh
(i.e., keep active or foreground) information they just perceived but that is no longer
externally present (Raye, Johnson, Mitchell, Reeder, & Greene, 2002; Raye et al., 2007).
Together, the findings are consistent with the idea that at least some of the lateral posterior
parietal activity during source memory tasks (Dobbins et al., 2002; Dobbins & Wagner,
2005; Kahn et al., 2004; Mitchell et al., 2008; Simons, Gilbert, et al., 2005; Simons, Owen,
et al., 2005; Vilberg & Rugg, 2007) reflects processes involved in selectively focusing on
and evaluating active information during remembering.
Two conceptually similar hypotheses formalized this idea contemporaneously by suggesting
that more superior posterior parietal regions (especially BA 7, but also 19) are involved in
top-down modulation of memory retrieval and more inferior posterior parietal regions (BAs
40, 39) are involved in bottom-up attention to active (e.g., perceived or retrieved)
information during retrieval (Cabeza, 2008; Ciaramelli, Grady, & Moscovitch, 2008; see
also, Cabeza et al., 2008; but see, Vilberg & Rugg, in press). Ciaramelli et al. (2008) refer to
the relevant areas as superior parietal lobe (SPL) and inferior parietal lobe (IPL) in their
hypothesis labeled Attention to Memory (AtoM), whereas Cabeza (2008) refers to essentially
these same areas as dorsal parietal cortex (DPC) and ventral parietal cortex (VPC),
respectively, in his hypothesis labeled the Dual Attentional Hypothesis (DAP). Both follow
directly from, and are parallel to, Corbetta and Shulman’s (2002) hypothesis regarding a
perceptual dual-attentional system in the parietal cortex.
Page 18

Consistent with the SMF idea of iterative heuristic and systematic processes during revival
and evaluation (Johnson & Raye, 2000), both the AtoM and the DAP hypothesis suggest an
interactive quality to the two “systems” whereby activity in inferior parietal cortex is driven
relatively heuristically by incoming stimuli (whether from perception or the product of
retrieval) and the superior region participates in, or is modulated by, more controlled
processes that are necessary for guided retrieval of information in response to more indirect
memory cues (whether externally or internally generated). Whereas both models suggest
direct interactions with MTL, the AtoM model more explicitly maps out interactions of
parietal cortex with PFC (see Ciaramelli et al., 2008, e.g., Figure 4). Both of these attention-
based hypotheses can accommodate a large part of the long-term episodic and source
memory findings regarding posterior lateral parietal activations discussed above, as well as
much of the patient and neuropsychological data (see Cabeza, 2008; Cabeza et al., 2008;
Ciaramelli et al., 2008, for details). Although both appear to address long-term memory
retrieval specifically (see also Berryhill et al., 2007), Mitchell et al. (2008) found both
inferior and superior lateral parietal activity associated with monitoring specific features
(format, location, cognitive operations) in a short-term source memory task that minimizes
retrieval from long-term memory, suggesting lateral posterior parietal activity is not
uniquely related to retrieval of information from long-term memory but rather will be seen
whenever the task requires attention to specific information during remembering.
In any event, this attentional approach makes unique predictions about dissociations among
episodic memory tasks that are supported by at least some fMRI data to date. Most notable
for current concerns, Ciaramelli et al. (2008) point out that whereas this approach would
predict both IPL and SPL activity associated with source memory compared to item memory
(IPL activity associated with processing specific active source detail and SPL activity
associated with greater need for controlled search in source than item memory tasks), it also
would predict SPL activity to show up more during source decisions in source identification
tasks than for Remember responses in Remember/Know tasks. This is because source
identification tasks ask participants about specific features defined by the task (e.g., location
information) whereas Remember responses can be made based on any information that
comes to mind. This prediction gains some support from Ciaramelli et al.’s review of
existing findings, and is consistent with the SMF proposal that although we should expect
much overlap in underlying processes among various episodic memory tasks, and thus much
overlap in the brain areas involved, neural activity also should differ in some respects
between different episodic memory tasks because the precise constellation of component
processes and features on which they draw is likely to differ. Likewise, the fact that similar
areas of SPL and IPL show up in short-term and long-term source memory tasks highlights
the idea that long-term memory and short-term memory consist of overlapping sets of
processes, but nevertheless may draw on different component processes and information in
any given context (e.g., Johnson & Hirst, 1993; see also, e.g., Dobbins & Han, 2006;
Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2005, 2008).
In sum, as suggested by the evidence reviewed here, attention to different features during
source memory tasks is selective (agenda-driven) both at encoding and at test (Johnson,
Kounios, & Nolde, 1997; Mitchell et al., 2008). Whether the particular focus adopted
produces accurate or inaccurate source memory should depend on whether it biases attention
to the most diagnostic features for a particular task. In addition, how successful any
particular agenda-driven focus is should also depend on the amount of competition from
irrelevant, or less relevant, features—more information is not necessarily better (Mitchell et
al., 2008). There is evidence for both feature-specific (e.g., category-selective regions) and
feature-general (parietal cortex) posterior activity associated with both encoding and
remembering of source information. Understanding how such activity is modulated by
specific subregions of PFC and interactions with specific MTL regions is the focus of
Page 19

current investigations and theorizing (e.g., Cabeza, 2008; Ciaramelli et al, 2008; Dobbins &
Wagner, 2005; see also Olson & Berryhill, in press, for a review). Systematic investigation
of such relationships should move us a long way toward a better characterization of the
subjective experience of source memory.
ADDITIONAL TOPICS OF SPECIAL RELEVANCE TO SOURCE MEMORY
Brain Areas Involved in Assessing the Qualitative Characteristics of Memories
As should be clear from the discussion thus far, the SMF is fundamentally concerned with
the specific characteristics of memories that give them an episodic or recollective quality
and the differences in qualitative characteristics across memories of different types.
Combining Memory Characteristics Questionnaire (MCQ) ratings (Johnson, et al., 1988)
with fMRI should be an especially powerful technique for clarifying the neural correlates of
the subjective experience of remembering. In particular, identifying brain regions where
activity correlates with rated vividness or amount of detail of various types would provide
more specific information than simply using, for example, Remember/Know responses.
Differentiating between regions that correlate with ratings of different qualities also would
be an important step toward understanding the neural bases of subjective memory reports,
how they are different from those involved in objective measures, and changes with
emotional arousal, age, brain damage, or psychopathology (see later sections).
Surprisingly, there have been few neuroimaging studies using this approach with well-
controlled stimuli (e.g., pictures). One possible reason is that such stimuli do not involve the
rich array of features and the temporal unfolding of meaningful scenarios involving the self
that make up our everyday remembering experiences. Neuroimaging studies examining the
neural correlates of autobiographical memory, on the other hand, offer an especially rich
platform for investigating the subjective experiences associated with remembering. These
studies tend to find regions that overlap with those found in more controlled laboratory
episodic memory tasks, including hippocampus and parahippocampus, as well as PFC,
retrosplenial/posterior cingulate cortex, precuneus, lateral temporal cortex, and lateral
parietal cortex (see, Cabeza & St Jacques, 2007, for a review; see also, Burianova & Grady,
2007; Cabeza et al., 2004, for studies that directly compared a standard laboratory episodic
and an autobiographical task). Moreover, a network that additionally includes medial PFC
and medial posterior cortical regions is of growing interest because of overlap between
activity associated with autobiographical memory tasks and with various other kinds of self-
referential tasks (see, Cavanna & Trimble, 2006; Macrae, Moran, Heatherton, Banfield, &
Kelley, 2004; Northoff, Heinzel, de Greck, Bermpohl, Dobrowolny, & Panksepp, 2006;
Ochsner et al., 2005; Vogt & Laureys, 2005, for reviews) and “self-projection” tasks (e.g.,
envisioning future events; Buckner & Carroll, 2007; Hassabis & Maguire, 2007; Schacter,
Addis, & Buckner, 2007). Information about the self may contribute to source memory in a
number of interesting ways, for example, as a feature of memories (e.g., like other objects),
an originator of information (e.g., imagining solutions to problems), or an experiencer of
events (e.g., emotional reactions), but this has yet to be systematically explored in fMRI
studies.
In one autobiographical memory fMRI study with feature ratings (Ryan et al., 2001)
participants recalled autobiographical memories while in the scanner and later rated them for
emotional valence, arousal, importance, vividness, and number of details. Recent and remote
memories did not differ in ratings and the hippocampus was equally active regardless of the
age of the memory. Unfortunately, this study did not report whether hippocampal activity
(or activity in any other regions) was associated with vividness or detail of the ratings.
Gilboa, Winocur, Grady, Hevenor, and Moscovitch (2004) studied autobiographical
memories elicited by photographs obtained from family and friends of the participants.
Page 20

Participants rated their memories post-scan and hippocampal activity was related to the
vividness of the remembering experience, but not the age of the memory (though there was
some difference in the distribution of activity within hippocampus, with more recent
memories activating the anterior portion). Other findings converge on the conclusion that it
is not the remoteness of an autobiographical memory, per se, that is associated with
hippocampal activity, but rather its qualitative characteristics, including the level of detail,
degree of personal significance, and emotionality (Addis, Moscovitch, Crawley, &
McAndrews, 2004). Although a full discussion of the various consolidation theories of
memory is beyond the scope of this review, we should note that some researchers (Gilboa et
al., 2004; see also Shimamura, 2002) cite evidence of hippocampal activity regardless of
remoteness of the memory as evidence against the idea that the hippocampus is only
necessary during a time-limited consolidation period (see Kensinger & Corkin, 2008, for
further discussion).
With respect to other brain areas, Daselaar et al. (2008) had participants recall
autobiographical memories in response to single word cues and examined the timecourse of
retrieval; participants also rated emotional intensity and the extent to which they felt they
were “reliving” the experience during the time of remembering. Consistent with the notion
that the phenomenal experience of remembering includes the retrieval and evaluation of
specific qualitative features, initial retrieval of the memory was associated with typical
episodic memory areas (e.g., hippocampus, retrosplenial cortex, right and medial PFC), and
the subsequent elaboration phase of each trial, during which additional information was
remembered, showed activity in posterior visual processing and imagery regions (e.g., BA
18/19, precuneus) as well as in left lateral PFC regions associated with retrieval and/or
evaluation of specific source information (BAs 9, 10, 44). Moreover, whereas ratings of
emotional intensity were associated with activity in amygdala and hippocampus during the
initial retrieval period, they were associated with PFC (frontal pole) during both periods.
Degree of “reliving” was related to activity, only during the later elaboration period, in
posterior visual areas and right inferior lateral and ventromedial PFC (anterior cingulate
cortex, BA 32). The authors suggest that MTL is involved in initial reactivation of
memories, which may be mediated by emotion, and further elaboration involves sensory
processing and imagery areas (e.g., visual cortex, precuneus) as well as left lateral PFC
regions, possibly involved in top-down modulation of the posterior regions during retrieval
and/or (re)construction or evaluation of specific details (see also, Botzung, Denkova, Ciuciu,
Scheiber, & Manning, 2008). Such an interpretation is supported by studies that have
examined more systematically the brain areas involved in memory for emotional
information.
Brain Areas Involved in Memory for Emotional Information
The literature on emotion and memory is broad, and our discussion is necessarily limited in
several ways. We use the term emotional here to refer to situations in which experimental
materials are chosen to be evocative, that is, likely to produce arousal in participants (e.g.,
negative/positive words [e.g., rape, slime, joy, peace], pictures [e.g., of accidents, war,
babies, puppies, faces expressing emotion], emotive film clips). We will not discuss, for
example, mood induction studies (see, e.g., Eich, Geraerts, Schooler, & Forgas, 2008 for a
review of behavioral mood studies). In addition, although important information has, and
continues to be, garnered from both animal and human studies involving, for example,
lesions and pharmacological interventions, those studies tend not to include fMRI and thus
are not covered here (for reviews see, e.g., Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza, 2006; Phelps, 2006).
Although valence is an important dimension of emotion, most of the effects in fMRI studies
to date suggest arousal as the key factor in the impact of emotion on source memory.
Because it is difficult to equate arousal for negative and positive information, most studies
Page 21

tend to use negative stimuli, or to collapse across valence. Thus, most of the effects
discussed below are related to processing negative (or negative and positive), highly
arousing stimuli; exceptions are noted.
In short, evidence suggests that emotion (i.e., arousal) can have differential effects on
memory for occurrence (e.g., item memory), subjective experience (e.g., vividness,
confidence, remember/know ratings), and objective accuracy of details (e.g., source
memory)(for reviews and discussion of behavioral findings, see, e.g., Christianson, 1992;
Reisberg & Heuer, 2004; for reviews that also discuss specific neural underpinnings of these
differences, see, e.g., Kensinger & Schacter, 2008a; Mather, 2007; Phelps & Sharot, 2008).
With respect to the brain areas involved, focus has been on the role of the amygdala in
modulating the effects of emotion on memory, but other brain areas important for memory
such as the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, also have been implicated.
Behavioral studies show that emotional information not only recruits perceptual attention
(e.g., Knight, Seymour, Gaunt, Baker, Nesmith, & Mather, 2007; Most, Chun, Widders, &
Zald, 2005) and reflective attention (e.g., Johnson Mitchell, Raye, McGuire, & Sanislow,
2006), it also can enhance perception, even at the lowest levels (e.g., by improving contrast
sensitivity, Phelps, Ling, & Carrasco, 2006). Consistent with this, posterior visual regions
(e.g., occipital cortex, fusiform gyrus) show greater activity during encoding of emotional
than neutral information (Kensinger, Garoff-Eaton, & Schacter, 2007; Mather et al., 2006;
Mickley & Kensinger, 2008; Mitchell, Mather, Johnson, Raye, & Greene, 2006; see Phan,
Wager, Taylor, & Liberzon, 2002 for a review). This enhanced perceptual processing would
help explain the better item recognition of emotional than neutral information in the long
term (see Kensinger, 2007; Mather, 2007 for reviews).
In addition, early PET (Cahill et al., 1996; Hamann, Ely, Grafton, & Kilts, 1999) and fMRI
(Canli, Zhao, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1999) studies showed that there was greater
activity in the amygdala during encoding of emotional than neutral items. Such effects
obtain for both positive and negative highly arousing stimuli (Hamann et al., 1999; see also,
Kensinger & Schacter, 2006; but see Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza, 2004; Mickley &
Kensinger, 2008 for evidence that some neural mechanisms may be different for positive
and negative information). Most important, the amount of activity in the amygdala correlates
with amount of emotional, but not neutral, information remembered at the aggregate level
(Cahill et al., 1996; Canli et al., 1999; Hamann et al., 1999), and moreover, the amount of
amygdala activity during encoding correlates with the online level of emotional reactions to,
and later accurate memory for, specific items (e.g., Canli, Zhao, Brewer, Gabrieli, & Cahill,
2000). The amygdala is more active also during the retrieval of emotional, compared to
neutral, information (e.g., Dolcos, LaBar, & Cabeza, 2005; see, Dolan, Lane, Chua, &
Fletcher, 2000 for an earlier PET study).
Evidence also suggests that the amygdala may modulate activation in other regions involved
in memory, thereby promoting item recognition. In particular, activity in the amygdala
during the successful encoding of emotional information is positively correlated with
activity in the hippocampus (e.g., Dolcos et al., 2004; Kensinger & Corkin, 2004). In a study
in which patients with damage to either the amygdala or hippocampus (and controls) were
scanned during encoding of emotional and neutral words, Richardson, Strange, and Dolan
(2004) showed that greater damage to the amygdala was associated with less activity in the
hippocampus during encoding and likewise, more hippocampal damage was related to less
amygdala activity. Such a pattern highlights the reciprocal influence of the amygdala and
hippocampus on encoding emotional information. Ritchey, Dolcos, and Cabeza (2008)
showed that the degree of amygdala-hippocampal connectivity is related to how well
emotional memories are remembered over time. Consistent with a modulatory role for
Page 22

amygdala, it also is associated with successful encoding and remembering of neutral
information encoded in an emotional, compared to neutral, context (Erk, Martin, & Walter,
2005; Maratos, Dolan, Morris, Henson, & Rugg, 2001; Smith, Henson, Dolan, & Rugg,
2004).
Evidence suggests, as well, that it is the interaction of amygdala and hippocampus that
underlies the increased sense of vividness that often accompanies memory for emotional
items (i.e., greater rates of Remember responses, higher confidence; see, e.g., Kensinger &
Schacter, 2008a; Phelps, 2006, for reviews). For example, in one study (Kensinger &
Corkin, 2004) activity in both amygdala and hippocampus during encoding was greater for
items later correctly given a remember response (compared to those that were forgotten),
and activity in these two regions was correlated for the remembered items. Hippocampus
and PFC activity, on the other hand, predicted subsequent remembering of both neutral and
negative low-arousal items. Thus, though the amygdala may not be necessary for a later
subjective sense of vivid remembering of non-arousing valenced information, it does appear
to be engaged when processing involves arousal.
An interesting point from the SMF perspective--one that has not yet been clearly articulated
or directly investigated with respect to brain correlates--centers on the difference between
source memory for the information that provokes emotion vs memory for the emotion itself
as a feature of an event memory. Focus has been primarily on the former, that is, on the
modulatory role that emotion (arousal) plays in memory formation and later remembering
via involvement of the amygdala and its influence on the hippocampus (presumably via
physiological mechanisms such as increasing cortisol levels; see Dolcos et al., 2006; Mather,
2007; Phelps, 2006 for reviews). In this way, arousal often enhances memory for
information such as perceptual details, which should lead to the subjective sense of vivid
remembering (as discussed above) and more accurate source memory (see below). What has
received less attention is the idea that emotion also can serve as a feature of the event which
can, much like perceptual detail, serve as evidence for source attributions (e.g., “I know he
said it because I remember that I was angry at him for it”). Like remembering perceptual or
contextual details, remembering information about how I (or someone else) felt would be
expected to lead to more vivid memories attributed with higher confidence, and so on.
A related point is that the precise functional connections involved in remembering emotional
information might depend on whether the emotion is subjectively experienced more
affectively (i.e., “hot cognition”, perhaps reflecting amygdala-hippocampus connectivity), as
when we feel again years later the pain of losing a loved one, or more cognitively (i.e., “cold
cognition”, perhaps reflecting PFC-hippocampus connectivity), as when we factually
remember we found a co-worker’s comment insulting at the time (see, Kensinger & Corkin,
2004 for a similar point). In other words, the pattern of brain activity observed may depend
on whether the emotion is processed, either at encoding or during later remembering, with
respect to an affective response or the affective content. In either case the information might
serve as a source cue.
Also interesting from the SMF perspective is that the increased sense of vividness or
recollective quality associated with memory for emotional information can be dissociated
from the accuracy of the source details. As with neutral information, people can give
remember ratings to, or have high confidence in, emotional items for which they cannot
accurately recollect specific event details (see, e.g., Sharot & Yonelinas, 2008 for a recent
behavioral study; see, e.g., Kensinger & Schacter, 2008a for a review of behavioral
findings). Hence, source errors can feel very real, especially if people weight emotional
responses or information as more important than other types of details. Sharot, Delgado, and
Phelps (2004) showed that with old-new recognition of emotional photos equated, amygdala
Page 23

activity during retrieval was correlated with remember judgments for emotional photos
whereas posterior parahippocampal activity was correlated with remember judgments for
neutral photos, suggesting that the neutral items were more likely to be associated with
memory for perceptual details than were emotional ones (see also Dolcos et al., 2005; see
also, e.g., Kensinger & Schacter, 2005a; Mickely & Kensinger, 2008 for evidence more
generally consistent with the idea that source attributions about neutral and emotional
information may be based on different characteristics).
Consistent with the idea that source memory is not always better for emotional information,
memory for type of encoding task was not found to be better for emotional than neutral
information, and in this case, amygdala activity was not correlated with accuracy of source
memory (though entorhinal cortex activity was; Kensinger & Schacter, 2006; see also
Dougal, Phelps, & Davachi, 2007). Also, in a working memory task in which four pictures
and their locations had to be remembered for several seconds, arousal negatively affected
source memory for the location of the items (i.e., item-location binding) and there was less
activity during encoding in binding related areas, such as the precentral-superior temporal
gyrus intersect, for emotional compared to neutral items. On the other hand, arousal
increased within-item binding, signaled by better picture memory, and there was greater
activity in posterior sensory areas for emotional than neutral items (Mather et al., 2006;
Mitchell, Mather, et al., 2006).
But, there also is evidence that source memory for emotional information sometimes may be
at least as accurate as, or more accurate than, neutral memories (for reviews of the
behavioral evidence, see, e.g., Kensinger, 2007; Mather, 2007). For example, Kensinger and
Schacter (2005b) showed that source accuracy for deciding whether an item had been seen
as a picture or only imagined during encoding was better for emotional than neutral items.
Whereas correct source attribution of emotional items was associated with greater encoding
activity in amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex (another emotion processing region),
hippocampus activity was associated with memory for both negative and neutral items. In
addition, there was a positive correlation between amygdala and hippocampus activity for
negative items, suggesting that emotion (amygdala) may have modulated memory binding
processes (hippocampus). In addition, Kensinger and Schacter (2007) had participants
discriminate between test probes that exactly matched neutral and negative pictures seen at
encoding and probes that were similar. Correct source attributions in this case require
memory for specific perceptual details. Accuracy was higher for emotional than neutral
items. Whereas activity in the fusiform gyrus was related to correct attributions during
remembering for all items, amygdala activity was related only to correct attributions for
negative items.
Overall, the pattern suggests that while emotion (and amygdala activity) may enhance the
encoding and remembering of some source information (e.g., perceptual details) it does not
necessarily enhance all contextual details (e.g., cognitive operations engaged). But the key
may not be the nature of the feature so much as how one distributes their attention. For
example, behavioral studies suggest that thinking about how one is feeling, rather than
attending to the perceptual and contextual details of an external event, may lead to good
memory about how one felt (Mikels, Larkin, Reuter-Lorenz, & Carstensen, 2005) but poor
memory for source specifying perceptual and contextual features (Johnson, Nolde, & De
Leonardis, 1996). Consistent with Easterbrook's (1959) cue-utilization hypothesis, Mather
(2007) has suggested that whereas arousal enhances binding of intra-object details (i.e.,
intrinsic features) it does not enhance (and can even impair) object-object and object-context
binding, especially when such binding relies on more extended reflective processing. This
idea may relate to potential functional differences in MTL regions (see section on MTL
Page 24

above), although more work is needed to understand fully the brain areas involved in such
effects.
In sum, neuroimaging, like earlier behavioral studies, provides contradictory evidence
regarding whether arousal enhances or disrupts source memory. Although progress is being
made, several critical issues are just beginning to be explored. It seems relatively clear that
the amygdala is involved in modulating hippocampally-based memory binding processes
during processing of emotional information (see also, e.g., Fenker, Schott, Richardson-
Klavehn, Heinze, & Düzel, 2005; also, Kensinger & Schacter, 2008a; Phelps & Sharot, 2008
for further discussion). Brain correlates associated specifically with memory for emotion as
a feature of an event, per se, however are less well understood. Based on a review of
existing literature, it has been suggested that the temporal pole is an area involved in the
binding of perceptual and emotional information (especially with respect to visceral
responses; Olson, Plotzker, & Ezzyat, 2007), but more systematic work is needed. Likewise,
evidence is just beginning to accumulate regarding differences in the neural underpinnings
of memory for emotional content vs emotional contexts (see Smith, Henson, Rugg, & Dolan,
2005 for a review and discussion). In addition, there may be individual differences in
responses to emotional information (e.g., related to sex, age, personality, genotype,
psychopathology; see, e.g., Haas & Canli, 2008; Hamann & Canli, 2004 for reviews) that
influence memory. More systematic consideration of the impact of individual differences on
the behavioral and neural correlates of source memory for emotional information and for the
impact of emotion on source memory for other features is warranted.
ERRORS, DEFICITS, AND PATHOLOGIES
False Memories As Source Errors
Because neither the processes, nor the representations, involved in source memory are
perfect, errors occur. A basic principle of the SMF is that inaccurate source memory (i.e.,
source confusions, source misattributions, source errors, source amnesia, source forgetting,
phantom recollections, illusory memories, memory distortions, false memories) and accurate
source memory arise via the same component cognitive mechanisms (Johnson, 2006;
Johnson & Raye, 1981; Lindsay, 2008; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000), and much has been
learned about source memory by using paradigms designed to provoke errors. Source errors
can be introduced at the time a memory is initially created (encoded) or as it is accessed and
evaluated, or when related memories are accessed. Behavioral studies confirm that anything
that disrupts (or inappropriately embellishes) the encoding, consolidation, or remembering
of the features of events usually reduces source memory accuracy, for example, dividing
attention (Dodson et al., 1998; Gruppuso, Lindsay, & Kelly, 1997; Jacoby, Kelley, Brown,
& Jasechko, 1989; Kelley & Sahakyan, 2003). Errors increase when the diagnosticity of
source information is reduced, for example, when events from different sources are
semantically or perceptually similar5 (Hashtroudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak, 1990; Lindsay,
Johnson, & Kwon, 1991; Mitchell & Zaragoza, 2001). Errors also increase when lax criteria
are used to evaluate mental experiences (Hekkanen & McEvoy, 2002; Lindsay & Johnson,
1989), when less diagnostic features are used (Marsh & Hicks, 1998) or features are
weighted inappropriately, or time available to make a source judgment is limited (Benjamin
5Source tasks typically involve more “items” than “sources” (e.g., many sentences spoken by two voices). However, source errors
occur even in situations with one-to-one mapping (e.g., Schacter, Osowiecki, Kaszniak, Kihlstrom, & Valdiserri, 1994). Any increase
in the overlap among features of event memories (whether defined as “item” or “context”) should increase the demands for more
specific information to differentiate among them. Interestingly, we often do not take into account the base rate occurrence of a feature
in using it as evidence for a source attribution. For example, when you attribute an idea to colleague A (someone you know well)
rather than B (someone you do not know well), you are likely to be satisfied that A came to mind without thinking that the probability
is higher they will come to mind, independent of their connection to the idea.
Page 25

& Craik, 2001; Johnson et al., 1994; Zaragoza & Lane, 1998). Motives and social context
can influence all of these (Gordon, Franklin, & Beck, 2005).
A particularly interesting type of source error results from confusing thoughts, associations,
and imaginations with actual perceptions (Henkel et al., 2000). For example, participants
sometimes claim to have seen pictures that they only imagined (Durso & Johnson, 1980),
and good imagers are more likely to misattribute imaginations to perceptions (Hyman &
Pentland, 1996). Neuroimaging evidence converges with this behavioral evidence in
suggesting that rich self-generated perceptual information induces source errors. For
example, one study compared source memory for imagined and seen pictures (Gonsalves et
al., 2004). Imagined pictures that were later erroneously called seen showed greater activity
in precuneus during encoding than imagined items later correctly called imagined. This area
is involved during other types of imagery tasks, supporting the idea that perceptual
information either generated via active imagination or imported from one item to another
(Lampinen et al., 2005; Lyle & Johnson, 2007) lends a sense of vividness to people’s false
memories for having seen the imagined items. Interestingly, in another study, there was less
activity at test in a region of medial anterior PFC when people erroneously remembered
seeing items during study that they had in fact only imagined than when they made correct
attributions (Turner et al., 2008). As previously discussed, this area is often active in reality
monitoring studies, and this finding supports the idea that cognitive operations information
(e.g., regarding self-generation) informs accurate reality monitoring decisions (Johnson,
Kounios, & Nolde, 1997; Johnson & Raye, 1981).
Okado and Stark (2003) found an area of left parietal cortex in which activity was not
different for true and false episodic memories, and the graded pattern of activity suggested
that it was related to the amount of memorial information activated: Actually seen items and
imagined items called seen showed greater activity than imagined items called new which
were greater than unseen items called new (see also, Cabeza, Rao, Wagner, Mayer, &
Schacter, 2001 for a similar finding with a different behavioral paradigm). Okado and Stark
also found that activity in left lateral PFC (BA 9; BA 10,46) was the same for true and false
memories, though unlike parietal cortex, in these PFC areas seen and imagined items called
seen and imagined items called new all showed greater activity than new items correctly
called new. Together, this pattern is consistent with the data discussed in previous sections
associating activity in parietal cortex with amount of information active and in left lateral
PFC with monitoring/evaluating that information. Consistent with the SMF, the pattern
further suggests that these areas are involved whether the memory is true or false.
It is important to keep in mind that although memories from different sources tend, on
average, to produce memorial representations that are characteristically different from each
other, variability within categories often creates overlap in the distributions of features. For
example, representations of some perceived events are less detailed and perceptually vivid
than representations of some imagined events, and some imagined events can be highly
elaborate and vivid. Thus, although people sometimes believe false memories are true
because they have perceptual, emotional, and other details, false memories often differ from
true memories, on average, in qualitative characteristics (Anastasi, Rhodes, & Burns, 2000;
Henkel et al., 2000; Johnson, Nolde, et al., 1997; Karpel, Hoyer, & Toglia, 2001; Norman &
Schacter, 1997). For example, Mather et al. (1997) found that "lures" (e.g., needle) were
falsely recognized as having been presented in a spoken list because they were semantically
related to presented items (haystack, thread, sharp; Deese, 1959; Roediger & McDermott,
1995), but these false memories were rated as having, on average, less auditory detail than
were accurate memories for items actually presented. Consistent with this, neuroimaging
studies suggest that some areas, especially posterior regions (e.g., early visual areas, e.g.,
BA 17, 18) differentiate true and false visual memories, whereas other posterior areas show
Page 26

similar activity (e.g., later visual processing areas, e.g., BA 19, 37) (Slotnick & Schacter,
2004; see, Okado & Stark, 2003, for another example of differences in visual areas). Thus,
whether a source misattribution error is made may depend on what “level” of perceptual
information is being assessed.
Differential activity associated with true and false memories has been observed in other
regions as well, including MTL, PFC, and parietal areas (Garoff-Eaton, Kensinger, &
Schacter, 2007; Garoff-Eaton, Slotnick, & Schacter, 2006; Kim & Cabeza, 2007a). For
example, Kim and Cabeza (2007b) used a semantically-related word procedure and showed
that high confidence true memories were associated with activity at test in MTL regions
(hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus) but false memories were associated with activity
in PFC and posterior parietal cortex.
Behavioral evidence shows that people can later come to misattribute false information that
they themselves generated and that they knew at the time was false (Ackil & Zaragoza,
1998). Hassabis and Maguire (2007) compared memory for recent autobiographical
memories with recent constructed fictitious experiences (mental experiences that the
participants knew they were constructing). In this case, the only brain regions more active
for real memories were anterior medial PFC and posterior medial cortex (posterior cingulate
cortex and precuneus), areas that are associated with self-referential processing (see,
Cavanna & Trimble, 2006; Macrae et al., 2004; Northoff et al., 2006; Ochsner et al., 2005;
Vogt & Laureys, 2005, for reviews) and “self-projection” tasks such as envisioning future
events (Buckner & Carroll, 2007; Schacter et al., 2007). Presumably, the extent to which
self-constructed events later come to be misattributed as actual autobiographical events
(Hashtroudi et al., 1990; Lindsay, Hagen, Read, Wade, & Garry, 2004; Loftus & Pickrell,
1995) would be related to the amount of imagined information that is revived and evaluated,
including information related to the self, and this should be reflected in the amount of brain
activity in these medial regions. This remains to be tested. Future fMRI studies such as those
noted above that ask participants about specific qualitative features of their memory (see
section on assessing qualitative characteristics), rather than just whether an item is
remembered (or to rate confidence), and that also manipulate the information people focus
on for making source decisions, should be helpful in understanding the neural mechanisms
of source errors/false memories.
Aging and Source Memory
Useful information about how source memory processes work, as well as how they can
break down, has been obtained from looking at age-related differences in source memory
(see, Johnson et al., 1993; Naveh-Benjamin & Old, 2008; Zacks & Hasher, 2006, for
reviews; see also Table 1). There is considerable evidence from the cognitive-behavioral
literature that, relative to young adults, older adults show memory binding deficits
(Chalfonte & Johnson, 1996; Glisky, Rubin, & Davidson, 2001; Mitchell, Johnson, Raye,
Mather, & D’Esposito, 2000; Naveh-Benjamin, 2000; Naveh-Benjamin, Brav, & Levy,
2007; O'Hanlon, Wilcox, & Kemper, 2001), source memory deficits that are greater than
item memory deficits (see, Kaszniak & Newman, 2000; Spencer & Raz, 1995 for reviews),
and reduced recollection along with relatively preserved familiarity-based responding
(Andersonet al., 2008; Healy, Light, & Chung, 2005; Parkin & Walter, 1992; Prull, Dawes,
Martin, Rosenberg, & Light, 2006; see, Light, Prull, La Voie, & Healy, 2000 for a review;
see also, Naveh-Benjamin & Old, 2008, for review of contrary evidence regarding
familiarity).
Consistent with this pattern, age-associated neuropathology in medial temporal regions has
been demonstrated (Golomb et al., 1996; O'Brien, Desmond, Ames, Schweitzer, & Tress,
1997; Raz, 2000; Raz et al., 2005; Small, Tsai, DeLaPaz, Mayeux, & Stern, 2002). Although
Page 27

changes in MTL specifically have been noted with the advance of Alzheimer’s Disease,
MTL volume does shrink with normal aging, with the greatest change in the hippocampus
and little, if any, change in surrounding areas such as entorhinal cortex (Raz, Rodrigue,
Head, Kennedy, & Acker, 2004). There is evidence of neurochemical changes as well
(Driscoll et al., 2003). Although volume and neurochemical changes have been linked to
age-related deficits in hippocampally-supported memory tasks (Driscoll et al., 2003), both
the relationship between age-related changes in MTL volume and memory function (Van
Petten, 2004) and between age-related decrements on MTL-based neuropsychological tests
and source memory tasks (Glisky & Kong, 2008; Glisky, Polster, & Routhieaux, 1995;
Henkel, Johnson, & De Leonardis, 1998; Mather, Johnson, & De Leonardis, 1999) have
been variable.
Aging disproportionately affects the PFC, compared to other brain regions (Raz & Rodrigue,
2006), and these structural and functional changes also have been associated with cognitive
dysfunction, though again, the relationships are far from perfect (see, e.g., Dennis & Cabeza,
2008; Raz & Rodrigue, 2006; Small et al., 2008; Valenzuela, Breakspear, & Sachdev, 2007
for reviews). Nevertheless, there are reports of positive correlations between older adults’
memory performance and scores on standard neuropsychological tasks sensitive to frontal
function (Bunce, 2003; Craik, Morris, Morris, & Loewen, 1990; Glisky et al., 1995; Henkel
et al., 1998; Moscovitch & Winocur, 1995), supporting general PFC theories of cognitive
decline in aging (Braver et al., 2001; Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Moscovitch & Winocur, 1995;
Parkin, 1997; Shimamura, 1995; West, 1996).
Although the number of functional neuroimaging studies of age-related cognitive change is
increasing, there still are relatively few fMRI studies that focus specifically on feature
binding and/or source memory (see Cabeza, 2006 for a review). The findings to date
highlight a particularly interesting piece of the puzzle: Exactly which regions of PFC are
functionally coupled with activity in hippocampal or other MTL regions during successful
memory encoding (e.g., binding) under different circumstances, and which are affected most
by age?
The first fMRI study looking at age-related changes in brain activity associated with
memory binding used a short term memory task (Mitchell, Johnson, Raye, & D’Esposito,
2000) to show that, consistent with long-term memory behavioral studies (Chalfonte &
Johnson, 1996; Naveh-Benjamin, 2000; see Old & Naveh-Benjamin, 2008 for a review),
there was an age-related behavioral deficit in memory for object-location combinations that
was disproportionate to deficits for either feature alone (see also, e.g., Grady et al., 1995).
Moreover, compared to young adults, older adults showed disproportionate attenuation of
activity in anterior hippocampus in the combination condition (relative to either feature
alone) during the delay period, suggesting an encoding deficit. There was also a suggestive,
though not significant, trend in that direction in medial PFC (BA 10), an area involved in
maintaining integrated, relative to individual, features in working memory (Prabhakaran,
Narayanan, Zhao, & Gabrieli, 2000). Although correlations between these two regions were
not conducted, the pattern of regional differences is consistent with the idea that age-related
source memory deficits are due, at least in part, to age-related decrements in memory
binding during encoding resulting from hippocampal dysfunction, PFC dysfunction, and/or
changes in hippocampal-PFC functional connectivity.
A more recent study by Dennis, Hayes, Prince, Madden, Huettel, and Cabeza (2008) looked
at brain activity during encoding of face-scene pairs that was associated with subsequent
successful long term memory. As in Mitchell et al. (2000), there was an age-related
reduction in hippocampal activity, relative to young adults, that was disproportionate to the
differences associated with memory for either feature alone. There also was an age-related
Page 28

reduction in bilateral dorsolateral PFC activity (rather than medial PFC, as in Mitchell et al.)
related to pair memory. In addition, the PFC regions demonstrating functional connectivity
during encoding with hippocampus were lateral regions (bilateral ventrolateral, right
dorsolateral and superior frontal cortex; see also, Gutchess et al., 2005)--areas identified in
other studies as engaged in various reflective processes involved in episodic memory tasks.
Interestingly, the hippocampal-PFC connectivity was stronger in older compared to young
adults. That this functional coupling should increase while activity levels in each area
decreases is an interesting conundrum, but it suggests that looking at both regional activity
and functional relationships will be important in understanding age-related changes. Because
the connectivity between the hippocampus and posterior regions (e.g., posterior cingulate,
parietal cortex, and inferior temporal regions) was weaker in older than young adults,
Dennis et al. suggested that age is associated with a posterior-to-anterior shift in the areas
that co-activate with hippocampus during encoding (see Davis, Dennis, Daselaar, Fleck, &
Cabeza, 2008 for further discussion of this hypothesis of cognitive aging).
The precise reasons for such a shift remain unclear (see section below on compensation
hypotheses), but it does raise the question of whether older adults’ difficulty in binding
features is driven, at least in part, by weak representations of the information in posterior
regions (or weak projections from/to posterior regions). Posterior representational areas
show less specificity of activation in older adults for distinct classes of information such as
faces and scenes (Chee et al., 2006; Park et al., 2004; Payer et al., 2006), and activity during
long term memory encoding tasks in a number of these areas is reduced in older, compared
to young, adults (Dennis & Cabeza, 2008; Dennis, Hayes, et al., 2008). Although in some
cases this may reflect age-related dysfunction of these areas, per se, or age-related
differences in perceptual attention to the various types of information (e.g., due to
differences in interest), recent evidence suggests an age-related deficit in the modulation of
posterior areas during reflective attention (Mitchell, Johnson, Higgins, & Johnson, 2009). In
addition, the Dennis, Hayes, et al. (2008) face-scene study mentioned above found that age-
related differences were greater for source than item subsequent memory effects in the
hippocampus and PFC, but not in inferior temporal representational areas (where age
deficits were equal for source and item memory). This suggests that older adults may have
difficulty in binding features besides a problem of less detailed feature representations, but
the relative contribution of each of these problems to older adults’ source memory
difficulties remains to be determined.
Together, the findings discussed thus far suggest that there may be multiple ways that PFC,
MTL, and posterior regions and/or their functional connectivity during encoding are affected
by aging (see Table 1). The pattern of deficits in these regions during encoding predicts age-
related decrements in the vividness of older adults’ memory for specific source information.
Consistent with this, in cognitive-behavioral studies using the Remember/Know procedure,
older adults often (but not always) give fewer Remember and more Know responses (Parkin
& Walter, 1992;Prull et al., 2006; see, Light et al., 2000;Zacks & Hasher, 2006, for
reviews). On the other hand, when older adults are asked to rate specific subjective qualities
of their memories such as perceptual, associative, or emotional detail they often rate their
memories to be at least as strong or vivid as do young adults, even when a variety of
objective memory measures, including source identification, show that they remember less
(Hashtroudi et al., 1990;Henkel et al., 1998;Lyle, Bloise, & Johnson, 2006; also Karpel et
al., 2001;Norman & Schacter, 1997). For autobiographical memories, as well, they give
MCQ ratings as high as (McGinnis & Roberts, 1996) or higher than (Comblain,
D'Argembeau, & Van der Linden, 2005;Rubin & Schulkind, 1997) young adults. As Bloise
(2008) noted, the different relation between age and subjective memory obtained with
different measures (e.g., R/K vs MCQ), and the sometimes lack of correspondence between
age differences on subjective and objective measures, suggests that young and older adults
Page 29

base their subjective reports on different types or combinations of features. Neuroimaging
evidence should help assess this possibility.
Using structural equation modeling on structural MR data and Remember/Know responding
during recall and recognition tasks, Yonelinas et al. (2007) reported a double-dissociation
whereby age-related reduction in hippocampal volume was associated with decreased
recollection (but not familiarity) and reduced entorhinal volume was related to decreased
familiarity (but not recollection). Using a recognition confidence measure, Daselaar, Fleck,
Dobbins, Madden, and Cabeza (2006) showed that older adults demonstrated less
recollection-related activity in hippocampus but greater familiarity-related activity in rhinal
cortex, relative to young adults. Daselaar and colleagues further found that whereas young
adults showed greater functional connectivity between the hippocampus and posterior
regions (e.g., parietal and retrosplenial cortex) associated with recollection, older adults
showed greater connectivity between rhinal cortex and PFC. This may reflect an increase in
frontally-mediated evaluation of familiarity. (See also, e.g., Duarte, Henson, & Graham,
2008; Duverne, Habibi, & Rugg, 2008; Morcom, Li, & Rugg, 2007 for other aging fMRI
studies using the Remember/Know procedure). Older adults also show deficits in left lateral
PFC during short-term source memory tasks, suggesting they either have problems
evaluating specific information or have less information available for evaluation, compared
to young adults (Mitchell, Raye, Johnson, & Greene, 2006).
With respect to subjective memory reports, Viard et al. (2007) presented older adult
participants with sentence cues to autobiographical memories from 5 time periods of their
life that had been obtained from family members (e.g., the wardrobe falls off of the roof of
the car) and had the older adults recall the events in the scanner and later rate the memories.
Although there was no young comparison group in this study, areas of activation common to
all time periods included some areas similar to those reported above for young adults,
including medial PFC (superior frontal gyrus) and posterior regions (precuneus/posterior
cingulate). In addition, they found right hippocampal activity related to the specificity and
number of details in postscan reports.
Behavioral studies suggest that source memory for affective information is relatively
preserved in older adults, compared to, for example, perceptual information (see, e.g., see
Kensinger, in press, for a review), and that older adults may be more likely to use affective
information in making source attributions (Hashtroudi et al, 1990; May, Rahhal, Berry, &
Leighton, 2005; Rahhal et al., 2002; see also, Johnson & Multhaup, 1992, for discussion).
Consistent evidence comes from a study showing age-differences in the brain areas
associated with subjective memory ratings for perceptual vs affective information. During
an incidental encoding task, Bloise (2008) showed young and older adults labeled photos of
various objects and scenes (e.g., jellyfish; couple on couch). After several weeks, on a
surprise old-new recognition test outside the scanner, they were cued with the names of the
pictures and rated their subjective memory for visual details and feelings and reactions
associated with items called old. Young adults’ encoding activity in right cuneus (a region
associated with visual processing and visual imagery, Ganis, Thompson, & Kosslyn, 2004;
Hadjikhani & Roland, 1998) was correlated with later visual detail ratings for items
correctly identified as old. Activity in medial posterior cingulate cortex (an area associated
with self referential processing; Johnson, Raye, Mitchell, Touryan, Greene, & Nolen-
Hoeksema, 2006; Kelley et al., 2002; Ochsner et al., 2004) was positively correlated with
subsequent reaction ratings.
For older adults, on the other hand, encoding activity in posterior cingulate cortex was
positively associated with subsequent visual detail ratings for correctly identified old items,
suggesting that, for older adults, self-referential processing during encoding affected their
Page 30

later sense of remembering visual details. One possibility is that older adults’ engaged in
self-referential processing during encoding (e.g., “that looks like the kitchen in my first
house”) and later the memory for those related, self-generated autobiographical details was
misattributed to the studied item (e.g., Henkel et al., 1998; Lyle et al., 2006). That is, older
adults may have been influenced by irrelevant information (Hasher, Lustig, & Zacks, 2007),
in this case, taking one attribute (e.g., affective or perceptual information associated with
their autobiographical memory) as evidence for another (e.g., externally-derived perceptual
information associated with the seen pictures). This might inflate perceptual vividness
ratings relative to the amount of actual visual detail remembered about the photos. Also
interesting was that, for older adults, activity in right inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47) during
encoding was negatively associated with subsequent visual detail ratings and positively
associated with reaction ratings. A similar area of right inferior frontal gyrus has been found
to be active during autobiographical retrieval (Greenberg, et al., 2005), suggesting that as
older adults engaged more in autobiographical retrieval during encoding, they processed less
of the specific visual details but more of the affective information of the photos.
Bloise’s (2008) findings highlight that young and older adults may differ in what they use as
evidence for a memory attribution (e.g., what they believe to be diagnostic or how they
weight different features in the same nominal situation). In addition, these findings point to
two important issues about the relation between emotion/personal reactions during encoding
and subsequent memory that require further investigation: (a) specifying the conditions
under which personal relevance/emotional reactions during encoding enhance or detract
from encoding perceptual and other details, and (b) specifying the conditions under which
personal relevance/emotional reactions may later be taken as evidence of perceptual
vividness.
Other work is beginning to explore age-related differences and similarities in brain activity
associated with source memory for emotional information (see, e.g., Kensinger, in press;
Kensinger & Schacter 2008b; Mather, 2004, for reviews). For example, Kensinger and
Schacter (2008b) had young and older adults encode positive, negative, and neutral pictures
during scanning and later tested recognition memory for pictures that were exactly the same
as, similar to, or different than pictures seen in the scanner. Consistent with evidence of
relatively preserved amygdala structure and function in aging (see Mather, 2004 for
discussion), they found that encoding activity in amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex
associated with subsequent accurate memory for both negative and positive emotional items
was similar for young and older adults; valence-specific responding was also similar
(negative items activated right fusiform cortex and positive items activated left lateral
middle and superior temporal regions as well as lateral PFC). Consistent with a positivity
bias in older adults (Mather, 2006), the only age difference was for positive items where
older adults showed more activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and cingulate gyrus than
young adults. Given that these areas also are involved in processing self-referential
information, the authors suggested that older adults may be more likely than young adults to
process positive emotional information with reference to themselves.
As might be predicted given the evidence discussed thus far, older adults are more
vulnerable than healthy young adults to many types of false memories (Budson, Sullivan,
Daffner, & Schacter, 2003; Henkel et al., 1998; Karpel et al., 2001; Lyle et al., 2006;
Mitchell, Johnson, & Mather, 2003; Multhaup, De Leonardis, & Johnson, 1999; Rybash &
Hrubi-Bopp, 2000: see, e.g., Schacter, Koutstaal, & Norman, 1997, for a review). For
example, perceptual similarity between an imagined and a perceived item increases the
proportion of imagined objects erroneously called seen, and disproportionately so for older
adults (Lyle et al., 2006; see also Henkel et al. 1998). It seems likely that such errors are
related to the age-related disruptions in hippocampus and PFC-mediated binding processes
Page 31

and the PFC-mediated evaluation processes discussed previously (see also Roediger &
Geraci, 2007).
A pair of papers by Dennis, Kim, and Cabeza (2007; 2008) shed light on this issue by
investigating false recognition of semantically related lures. Dennis et al. (2007) showed that
encoding-related activity in MTL, left ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, and visual cortices
associated with subsequent true memory was reduced in older adults, compared to young
adults, but that older adults showed increased activity in right ventrolateral PFC. Increased
age-related encoding activity in left superior temporal gyrus was seen for both subsequent
true and false memories. Similarly, older adults, relative to young adults, showed less
activity during correct remembering of presented words in hippocampus but greater activity
in retrosplenial cortex; during false remembering of non-presented items, older adults
showed relatively greater activity in lateral temporal cortex (Dennis et al., 2008). The
authors interpret this overall pattern as consistent with an age-related reduction in encoding
and recollection of specific information and increase in more semantically-based (or
familiarity-based) responding, which leads to errors in this paradigm. More work looking at
age-related false memories under a range of circumstances is needed before the neural
correlates associated with age-related increases in source misattributions are completely
understood.
Age-related compensatory mechanisms—One topic that has drawn special attention
in the neuroimaging of cognitive aging domain is the functional role of additional brain
activity in older adults, compared to young adults. Reduced activity in PFC and areas of
MTL in older, compared to young, adults is found at both encoding (Cabeza et al., 1997;
Dennis et al., 2007; Mitchell, Johnson, Raye, & D’Esposito, 2000; Sperling et al., 2003) and
remembering (Cabeza, Anderson, Locantore, & McIntosh, 2002; Dennis, Kim, & Cabeza,
2008; Mitchell et al., 2006) in source memory tasks (for reviews, see, Cabeza, 2006;
Daselaar & Cabeza, 2008; Dennis & Cabeza, 2008; Persson & Nyberg, 2006). These age-
related reductions in activity are often, but not always, associated with increased activity in
other regions, especially in contralateral PFC regions (see, e.g., Cabeza, 2002; Daselaar &
Cabeza, 2008; Grady, 2008; Reuter-Lorenz, 2002, for reviews). This additional activation
seen in older adults is sometimes attributed to neural dedifferentiation (i.e., a loss of neural
efficiency; e.g., Morcom et al., 2007). However, because the additional activity is often
greatest for high functioning older adults (according to performance on neuropsychological
assessments of frontal functioning, for example, or the primary memory task), it also has
been attributed to compensation on the part of older adults (Cabeza, 2002; Reuter-Lorenz,
2002). Additional information is gained about the functional significance of such activity
when regional activity is directly correlated with performance (Grady, Yu, & Alain, 2008),
but it is still unclear whether the added activity represents the recruitment of additional areas
to do the same processing or the recruitment of different processes to do the same task (see,
e.g., Grady, 2008 for discussion; see Velanova, Lustig, Jacoby, & Buckner, 2007 for an
example of how researchers are trying to formalize age-related compensatory models).
What is relatively clear is that age-related behavioral deficits in source memory are due, at
least in part, to decreased functioning of the hippocampus and PFC, and/or hippocampus-
PFC interactions, which leads to deficits in memory binding and the systematic, controlled
processes necessary for reviving and evaluating source information. What is needed are
fMRI studies that systematically explore potential differences in age-related decline in
various sub-regions of the MTL and PFC, as well as functional connectivity between areas,
that may be differentially involved in specific cognitive functions (e.g., refreshing, noting,
shifting; Johnson, 1992) relevant to binding and source memory (Johnson et al., 2005;
MacPherson, Phillips, & Della Sala, 2002; Rajah & D’Esposito, 2005).
Page 32

Clinically Significant Deficits in Source Memory
The profound amnesia resulting from damage to MTL, especially the hippocampus, is an
extreme source memory deficit in that features do not seem to be bound together to create
distinct event memories. The most notable symptom of such damage is loss of event
memories rather than simply reduced memory for details, or increased false memories. In
contrast, frontal damage, especially combined with damage to certain other areas (e.g., basal
forebrain), sometimes results in profound source confusions called confabulations.
Psychopathology also can result in increased frequency and/or bizarreness of memory
distortions beyond the normal range of everyday errors. Previous reviews have considered
the literature on confabulation resulting from brain damage (Burgess & Shallice, 1996;
Johnson et al., 2000; Metcalf, Langdon, & Colheart, 2007), and we focus here on source
memory deficits associated with psychopathology.
According to the SMF, clinically significant source memory errors are created by the same
factors as are "normal" source misattributions: Inadequate feature binding, disrupted
consolidation and revival processes, constructive/reconstructive elaboration, associative
importing of features, failure to engage appropriate evaluation processes or to use
situationally-appropriate feature weights and criteria (e.g., inappropriate search agendas),
poor self-cuing to retrieve related supporting/disconfirming information, and/or failure to
access or use general knowledge about the world or the self to offset implausible or bizarre
thoughts (Johnson, 1988, 1991; Johnson & Raye, 2000). In addition, deficits in source
memory mechanisms may be compounded by motivation (Fotopoulou, Conway, & Solms,
2007), as well as personality and other individual differences (e.g., imagery vividness). It
should not be surprising then that fMRI studies are starting to implicate dysfunction in many
of the same brain areas discussed throughout this review in the source memory deficits
associated with psychopathology. We focus here on three disorders in which poor source
memory appears to be a central cognitive factor: schizophrenia, post-traumatic stress
disorder, and depression (see Table 1).
Schizophrenia—Schizophrenia is associated with episodic memory deficits (see, Aleman,
Hijman, De Haan, & Kahn, 1999; Boyer, Phillips, Rousseau, & Ilivitsky, 2007; Danion,
Huron, Vidailhet, & Berna, 2007; Ranganath, Minzeberg, & Ragland, 2008; Weiss &
Heckers, 2001, for reviews). In particular, behavioral studies show that schizophrenic
patients exhibit deficits in binding multiple features into complex representations (e.g.,
Burglen et al., 2004; Danion, Rizzo, & Bruant, 1999; Rizzo, Danion, Van der Linden,
Grange ́, & Rohmer, 1996; Waters, Maybery, Badcock, & Michie, 2004). One dominant
hypothesis is that schizophrenia-related binding deficits are due to decreased hippocampal
volume or function associated with the disorder (see Boyer et al., 2007 for a review). But,
there is also evidence for abnormal PFC-hippocampal functional connectivity during
working memory tasks in patients (Meyer-Lindenberg et al., 2005), and this would likely
contribute to binding deficits. In addition, feature binding during memory encoding of more
affective-laden stimuli (pictures) has been associated with activation in an area that includes
superior temporal gyrus (STG; e.g., Mather et al., 2006), and a review of MRI findings
showed reliable reductions in STG volume in patients with schizophrenia.(Shenton, Dickey,
Frumin, & McCarley, 2001).
fMRI studies also point to a role for PFC deficits in the associative memory problems seen
in schizophrenia. For example, Lepage et al. (2006) scanned patients and control participants
as they encoded, and later remembered, either individual items or pairs of items.
Behaviorally, although both groups had better item than associative recognition
performance, there was an interaction such that the schizophrenic group performed more
poorly than controls on the associative but not the item task. At encoding, the control group
Page 33

showed greater left dorsolateral PFC (BA 9) and anterior cingulate cortex activity in the
associative compared to the item memory condition, relative to the patient group (and, in the
STG, as well, a point we return to below). At test, control participants showed greater
activity, relative to the patient group, for the associative than the item task in left
dorsolateral PFC (BA 46) and right inferior PFC (BA 47), as well as medial PFC (including
anterior cingulate cortex), and superior parietal lobe (BA 7)--all areas implicated in source
memory. Evidence from a transitive inference task during fMRI also implicates a deficit in
hippocampal activity during remembering associations on the part of schizophrenic patients
(Õngur et al., 2007; see Boyer et al., 2007 for a review across paradigms).
Hallucinations in schizophrenia are believed to result from particular deficits in reality
monitoring (differentiating between internally-generated and externally-derived information;
see, e.g., Ditman & Kuperberg, 2005 for a review). Consistent with this hypothesis, the
smaller schizophrenia patients’ left STG, the more severe their hallucinations (Onitsuka et
al., 2004) and a small STG seems to be a predisposing factor for the disease rather than a
result of it (Rajarethinam, Sahni, Rosenberg, & Keshavan, 2004). The correlation between
size of STG and degree of hallucination makes sense if this area aids in the formation of
associations among aspects of an event that are critical for later remembering its source
(e.g., Mather et al., 2006; Mitchell, Mather, et al., 2006). Consistent with this hypothesis,
controls showed greater STG activation than patients with schizophrenia when imagining
sentences being spoken in someone else’s voice or listening to external speech, suggesting
that this area helps create associations between the source of speech and what is said and
that it is dysfunctional in schizophrenia (McGuire et al., 1995; Woodruff et al., 1997). Thus,
although STG has received relatively little attention in fMRI studies of source memory, the
accumulating data point to a functional role for this area, likely in relatively early memorial
binding processes. Whether the disruption in binding and source memory seen in
schizophrenia is related in particular to emotion-related disruption of processing in STG, a
possibility suggested by the Mather et al. (2006) results, remains to be seen.
Interestingly, in a study in which schizophrenia patients who did, and did not, hallucinate
were scanned as they made reality monitoring judgments (whether words were previously
said or heard), hallucinating patients showed more widespread activity in left BA 40 and 44,
areas associated with processing phonological information/inner speech (Woodward et al.,
2008; see also, e.g., Hoffman, 2008; Hoffman et al., 2007). Presumably this more extensive
activity is associated with more vividly experienced internal speech, making it harder to
discriminate internally from externally derived items. In addition, the monitoring of internal
speech involves the interaction of areas involved in speech generation (e.g., left inferior
frontal cortex) and speech perception (e.g, temporal cortex), and the modulatory relationship
between these areas appears to be disrupted in schizophrenic patients with a history of
auditory hallucinations (Shergill et al., 2003). One recent study in which schizophrenic
participants were scanned as they experienced auditory hallucinations vs generated “normal”
inner speech (in separate sessions) suggested that the difference was in the laterality of
activation in language areas such as inferior frontal gyrus and superior temporal gyrus
(Sommer et al., 2008): left for normal inner speech and right for hallucinations. These
laterality differences appeared to be related to the low semantic content and negative
emotionality of hallucinations.
It is notable that schizophrenia is associated with dysfunction in medial anterior (i.e., rostral)
PFC, an area we previously discussed as being especially sensitive to monitoring self- vs
other generated information (Simons et al., 2008; Simons, Davis et al., 2006; Simons,
Gilbert, et al., 2005; Simons, Owen, et al., 2005; Turner et al., 2008; Vinogradov et al.,
2006; see also Ciaramelli & Spaniol, 2008; see discussion in Simons et al., 2006; but see,
Ragland, Valdez, Loughead, Gur, & Gur, 2006). A recent study showed that schizophrenic
Page 34

patients were slower and less accurate than control participants at a reality monitoring task
requiring them to differentiate whether words were self-generated or read during encoding;
moreover, the schizophrenic group showed a deficit in medial anterior PFC activity (medial
BA 10) during correct identification of self-generated items (Vinograd, Luks, Schulman, &
Simpson, 2008). It remains to be resolved whether schizophrenia patients’ difficulty
monitoring self-generated information is a primary deficit (e.g., dysfunction of medial
anterior PFC) or secondary to a deficit in binding source and content information (e.g.,
related to dysfunction of STG or hippocampus). In either case, it seems clear that at least
some of the cognitive deficits (i.e., memory binding) and clinical symptoms (i.e.,
hallucinations) associated with schizophrenia are associated with dysfunction in stimulus
and speech processing areas, temporal binding areas, and prefrontal areas (e.g., medial PFC)
involved in representing and/or monitoring internally-generated information (see, e.g.,
Allen, Larøi, McGuire, & Aleman, 2008 for further review).
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)—PTSD is associated with both structural and
functional abnormalities in the hippocampus, PFC, and amygdala (see, e.g., Bremner, 2007;
Shin, Rauch, & Pitman, 2006, for reviews). It is also associated with both intrusive vivid
recollections of the triggering traumatic event and impoverished episodic memory for other
events (see, e.g., Bremner, 2007; Brewin, Kleiner, Vasterling, & Field, 2007; Liberzon &
Sripada, 2008; McNally, 2006, for reviews). We will deal primarily with the latter.
In addition to less vivid episodic memory (e.g., reduced Remember responses, Tapia,
Clarys, El Hage, Belzung, & Isingrini, 2007), PTSD is associated with poor source
identification for both emotional (Golier, Harvey, Steiner, & Yehuda, 1997) and neutral
(Fichtenholtz et al., 2008) information. In addition, autobiographical memory is often
fragmented (i.e., events are de-contextualized), especially, but not only, for the traumatic
events (Bremner, Krystal, Southwick, & Charney, 1995; but see, Rubin, Feldman, &
Beckham, 2004). Together, this pattern suggests PTSD is related to deficits in encoding
processes, especially memory binding, and, perhaps, with difficulty in monitoring specific
information during remembering.
We know of no published PTSD fMRI studies to date that have used source identification
tasks, or other kinds of subjective or objective measures of source memory (e.g., Remember/
Know; MCQ ratings). However, relevant information can be gleaned from studies in which
PTSD patients (and control groups) were scanned while encoding and remembering neutral
paired-associates. For example, Geuze, Vermetten, Ruf, de Kloet, and Westenberg (2008)
scanned male veterans with trauma experience, and who did or did not have PTSD, as they
encoded word pairs and then performed a cued-recall task. Behaviorally, the PTSD group
did only marginally worse than the control group, consistent with the finding that many of
the standard “memory related” brain regions were active in both the PTSD and non-PTSD
group (e.g., dorsolateral PFC, anterior cingulate cortex, parietal lobe, parahippocampal
gyrus). Nevertheless, during encoding, the PTSD group exhibited less activity than did the
control group in several PFC regions including bilateral inferior and left middle and superior
frontal gyri (as well as left posterior middle temporal gyrus, and left precuneus) but they
exhibited more activity in several temporal regions, including bilateral superior temporal
gyrus, right middle and left inferior temporal gyri, as well as right parahippocampal gyrus.
Interestingly, correlations showed that activity in the temporal regions was not related to
memory performance. Thus, although PTSD patients appeared to recruit temporal areas to a
greater extent than controls, perhaps to compensate for less PFC activity6, the functional
6This apparent anterior-to-posterior shift stands in contrast to the posterior-to-anterior shift associated with aging noted above,
perhaps arguing against a strong version of the notion that PTSD is akin to accelerated aging with respect to functional brain changes
(Bremner & Narayan, 1998).
Page 35

role of this activity is unclear. During remembering, the PTSD group showed less activity
than did the control group in both PFC (right inferior frontal and precentral gyri) and several
temporal regions (left hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus, middle and superior temporal
gyri). Another study compared PTSD patients with mixed trauma history to non-trauma
control participants on a face-profession paired-associate task and showed generally similar
results (Werner et al., 2009). Although more work is needed, such a pattern suggests a
deficit in the functional relationship between the PFC and temporal regions during relational
encoding in PTSD. Presumably this dysfunction should lead to less information, or less
diagnostic or specific information, being encoded, and/or weaker relationships between
items and their context. Although there was only a marginal deficit in behavioral
performance in the Geuze et al. study, and no difference in the Werner et al. study, deficits
in the functional relationship between brain regions should make it more difficult to later,
perhaps after a longer delay (Qin et al., 2003), remember source information.
Whether or not there are source memory deficits for emotional information, in particular, is
also of interest. PTSD is associated with increased attention to negative stimuli (e.g., Bleich,
Attias, & Furman, 1996). Although the picture regarding neural mechanisms associated with
this attentional bias is not entirely clear, differences in several brain areas have been
implicated including medial prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex, parietal regions, anterior
cingulate cortex, and amygdala (Liberzon et al., 1999; Rauch et al., 2000; Zubieta et al.,
1999). For example, neuroimaging studies that expose PTSD patients and controls to various
kinds of emotional stimuli generally show that PTSD patients have a much larger amygdala
response to trauma related stimuli and reduced activity in the medial frontal cortex,
compared to control participants (see Bremner, 2007 for a review). Within the range of
“normal” reactions to emotional information that were discussed above in the section on
emotion, increased amygdala activity modulates the hippocampus and is associated with
better memory. The hyper amygdala reactions of PTSD patients, on the other hand, appear
to be on the downside of the Yerkes-Dodson arousal curve: In some early PET studies,
PTSD patients showed less hippocampal activity (even after controlling for reduced volume)
than did controls during encoding of emotional paragraphs and also during the recall of
emotional word pairs (Bremner et al., 2003). Together, such findings suggest that memory
binding for emotional information may be especially affected in PTSD, a possibility under
current investigation in our lab.
Also relevant are studies looking at memory for neutral information that had been previously
encoded in emotional vs neutral contexts. One event-related fMRI study scanned
participants with PTSD (but no depression), depression (but no PTSD), and a trauma
matched group without psychopathology as they tried to remember neutral information that
had been previously encoded with either emotional or neutral picture backgrounds (Whalley,
Rugg, Smith, Dolan, & Brewin, 2008). There were no differences in old-new recognition
performance for the items encoded in emotional vs neutral contexts in any group, but both
the PTSD and depressed group showed poorer memory overall than controls. Many of the
standard memory areas were commonly active during test in all groups (e.g., several regions
of left PFC, precuneus). However, relative to the other groups, PTSD participants showed
increased activity for old items (regardless of encoding context) in left dorsal amygdala/
ventral striatum and right middle occipital cortex and decreased activity in right dorsolateral
PFC (BA 46). Relative to the other groups, the PTSD group also showed increased activity
for correctly identified items encoded in emotional, compared to neutral contexts, in several
areas associated with successful episodic memory including insula, hippocampus,
precuneus/posterior cingulate, right occipital cortex. One interpretation of this pattern is that
the PTSD group became more aroused during recognition because of incidental activation of
some of the emotional context information (as indicated by increased amygdala and
occipital cortex), and that this emotional response was taken (appropriately) as evidence that
Page 36

the item had been seen before. Unfortunately, the authors did not report on the depressed
group relative to the other groups: Depression also is associated with episodic memory
deficits but we know little about the neural underpinnings, as discussed next.
Depression—People with depression tend to have vague, or over-general, memories
compared to non-depressed individuals and they perform more poorly than controls on
source memory tasks (e.g., Degl’Innocenti, & Backman, 1999; see, e.g., Hertel, 1992, 2000;
Williams et al., 2007 for reviews). Major depression is associated with a memory bias for
negative information, and this bias may be related to sustained amygdala activity on the part
of depressed individuals related to initial processing of emotional information (Siegle,
Steinhauer, Thase, Stenger, & Carter, 2002; Siegle, Thompson, Carter, Steinhauer, & Thase,
2007). On interleaved trials, Siegel et al. (2002) had depressed and non-depressed
individuals indicate the valence of some positive and negative words and rate the personal
relevance of others. These tasks alternated with trials of a non-emotional task (Sternberg
number memory task). Compared to non-depressed individuals, depressed participants
showed greater sustained amygdala response for negative but not positive items. The
timecourse of the activity suggested that it was sustained for up to 30 seconds after the brief
exposure, even though participants were given the interspersed non-emotional task as
distraction. Depressed individuals showed less activity than controls, on the other hand, in
left dorsolateral PFC (BA 46) related to processing negative information. Interestingly,
depressed individuals also showed increased activity for negative items in posterior
cingulate and inferior parietal lobe (BA 40), two areas associated with self-referential
thinking, as well as episodic and autobiographical remembering. The authors suggested that
depressed individuals engage in prolonged self-relevant processing of negative information,
as evidenced by a positive correlation between amygdala activity during negative
information processing and self-reported rumination in this study.
Studies with non-clinical participants have demonstrated activity in both PFC and amygdala
related to emotion regulation (e.g., Goldin, McRae, Ramel, & Gross, 2008) and they provide
evidence suggesting top-down modulation of amygdala activity by PFC (e.g., Cunningham,
Johnson, Raye, Gatenby, Gore, & Banaji, 2004). Using a blocked design, Siegle et al. (2007)
had depressed and non-depressed participants do a non-emotional cognitive task (digit
sorting) followed by an emotional task (rating personal relevance of negative, positive, and
neutral words) inside the scanner. They replicated the earlier finding (Siegle et al., 2002) of
sustained amygdala activity in depressed individuals during the emotional task and also
showed that depressed individuals had reduced activity in dorsolateral PFC (primarily left;
middle frontal gyrus; BA9, 46) during both tasks. Furthermore, for negative trials, functional
connectivity between the rostral cingulate cortex and the amygdala and dorsolateral PFC
was somewhat attenuated in the depressed participants relative to controls, consistent with
disruption in a control circuit that may be involved in emotion regulation. Certainly,
increased processing given to negative information because of a negativity bias would be
expected to lead to better item memory among depressed individuals for negative than
neutral or positive information. A recent fMRI study (Hamilton & Gotlib, 2008) confirmed
such a bias for negative, compared to positive, pictures and moreover, tied it to increased
activity in amygdala and greater functional connectivity between the amygdala and
hippocampus in depressed individuals.
We know of no fMRI studies that used source identification, relational memory, or other
objective or subjective measures of the qualitative characteristics of remembering with
clinically depressed individuals. However, given the discussion above about the impact of
arousal on item vs source memory (e.g., Mather, 2007), enhanced processing of negative
information on the part of depressed individuals might be expected to result in poorer
memory for the context of encounter (i.e., source memory) of negative information
Page 37

associated with depression, relative to controls. A hint of this possibility can be found in the
binding study of Mather et al. (2006, Experiment 1, discussed above), in which a random
sample of undergraduates showed a negative correlation between scores on a depression
measure and accuracy of source memory for arousing picture-location pairings. Whether this
pattern obtains in a group of clinically depressed students, and the neural underpinnings, are
currently under investigation in our lab (Mitchell, Nolen-Hoeksema, & Johnson, 2009).
In sum, although the findings discussed in this section are informative, more systematic
work comparing various patient groups using both emotional and neutral stimuli in source
memory paradigms would go a long way toward clarifying dysfunctions of PFC, amygdala,
hippocampus, and other regions of the emotion and memory networks that may play a role
in the source memory deficits associated with these disorders. In addition, co-morbidity
across disorders and heterogeneity within will need to be considered to develop a fuller
understanding, as such differences could be related to variation in the precise constellation
of brain mechanisms involved. For example, in a behavioral study, Thoma, Zoppelt, Wiebel,
and Daum (2006) found that recollection, but not familiarity, appeared to be reduced in a
group of schizophrenic patients with greater negative symptoms compared to both controls
and schizophrenic patients with less negative symptoms. Based on a constellation of
evidence from lesion, metabolic, and neuroimaging studies, they speculated that such a
pattern may be related to disruption of connectivity between thalamic and frontal areas as
this would be expected to affect both negative symptomology and episodic memory (see
Thoma et al., 2006 for their evidence). But, this hypothesis remains to be directly tested. As
another example, a recent meta-analysis of behavioral studies looking at source memory in
schizophrenia showed that effects were larger for paired-associate tasks than for source
identification tasks, but that there were no differences in the size of the effects across
various types of source identification tasks (e.g., external-external vs internal-external)
(Achim & Weiss, 2008). However this analysis did not consider whether or not the
schizophrenics hallucinated, citing too few studies of each type and high variability within
type as limiting factors in conducting such a comparison. But, given the evidence discussed
above suggesting that difficulty binding voice and content information (related to deficits in
STG) is related to degree of hallucination, and that there are deficits in medial anterior PFC
during reality monitoring tasks in schizophrenia, differentiating in studies between those
who hallucinate and those who do not is necessary to develop a fuller understanding of the
cognitive and neural underpinning of the disorder (see, e.g., Brunelin et al., 2006 for
behavioral evidence). Challenges for the future also include identifying the pattern of
specific component processes, and related brain areas, disrupted in these disorders. Such
specificity may help in the development of more targeted treatment options, offer
biomarkers for testing the efficacy of such treatments, and advance more generally our
understanding of processes contributing to source memory at encoding and during
remembering, as well as their disruption in these disorders.
CURRENT STATUS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In their 1993 paper, Johnson, Hashtroudi and Lindsay proposed the SMF for organizing
existing empirical findings in the memory domain across a broad range of approaches and
paradigms (see also Johnson & Raye, 2000; Lindsay, 2008; Mitchell & Johnson, 2000). In
considering what distinguishes the SMF as a general research strategy, primary emphasis
was placed on: (a) identifying the specific qualitative characteristics that compose episodic
memories of different types; (b) specifying the perceptual and reflective component
processes involved in encoding those characteristics, binding them together to form coherent
event representations, reviving them in response to both internal and external cues,
evaluating them in the context of complex agendas according to flexible criteria, and in
making attributional decisions as to their origins; and, (c) understanding how these features
Page 38

and processes combine under different circumstances to produce the range of phenomenal
experiences associated with both true and false memories.
Since 1993, neuroimaging clearly has enriched our understanding of the brain mechanisms
supporting source memory. In particular, fMRI studies are beginning to identify brain
regions associated with the encoding and remembering of specific types of information
(semantic, perceptual, spatial, temporal, emotional, etc.) that give rise to the phenomenal
experience of remembering, and to characterize neural activity associated with variations in
the subjective qualities (e.g., vividness) of these characteristics. Likewise, studies are
beginning to identify the brain areas, and networks of brain regions, associated with specific
component cognitive processes (e.g., initiating, refreshing, selecting, reviving, evaluating)
and how they combine under different agendas to remember (Dobbins & Han, 2006;
Johnson & Hirst, 1993; Ranganath & Blumenfeld, 2005; see also, e.g., Hassabis & Maguire,
2007; Jonides et al., 2008; Uncapher & Rugg, 2008). In addition, the possibility that such
component processes are not unique to source memory, but have more general functions, is
of growing interest (Dobbins & Han, 2006; Fleck et al., 2006; Hayama et al., 2008; Johnson
et al., 2005). Consistent with the SMF, studies are finding substantial overlap, yet still some
differences, in neural activity associated with veridical and false memories. Together, all of
these findings are helping to elucidate the changes in source memory accompanying
development (e.g., normal aging) and pathologies (e.g., schizophrenia, PTSD, depression).
Increasing use of cross-method approaches should advance all of these efforts, for example,
using ERP with fMRI to isolate the temporal signature of various component processes (e.g.,
revival vs evaluation of information), or using TMS to explore the causal role of brain areas
identified in fMRI studies.
fMRI findings also are prompting investigators to articulate theoretical assumptions
(whether explicitly or tacitly held) with greater specificity. For example, as discussed above,
making sense of the patterns of activations in subregions of PFC has pushed investigators
beyond reference to broad concepts like encoding, retrieval, or monitoring and toward
isolating component processes involved in these aspects of remembering. A current hotbed
of theoretical debate centers on the role of various subregions of MTL in different aspects of
remembering. Consistent with the SMF approach, findings are leading some investigators to
focus on the specific features that comprise remembering rather than on more general
concepts such as recollection and familiarity (e.g., Davachi, 2006; Diana et al., 2007; Mayes
et al., 2007; Squire et al., 2007). Interestingly, the general concept of memory strength
remains popular (e.g., Squire et al., 2007; Wais, 2008; Wixted, 2007). Some formal models
have attempted to reconcile the idea of strength with the SMF idea of undifferentiated vs
differentiated features, for example, by suggesting memories are composed of both global
(i.e., undifferentiated) and specific (i.e., differentiated) strength (e.g., Rotello et al., 2004) or
by allowing multidimensional memories to be expressed within unidimensional space (e.g.,
Banks, 2000). Each of these ideas allows remembering to vary on a continuum in a signal-
detection fashion. Although such models may accommodate behavioral data such as that
produced via ROC curves, precisely how to use them to interpret patterns of brain activity
from specific regions remains a puzzle whose solution appears currently to require debatable
assumptions (see, e.g., Kirwin et al., 2008 and discussion above in MTL section).
Our position is that continued focus on neural activity associated with specific features and
component processes is likely to result in the most gain in our understanding of the
phenomenal experience of remembering. Nevertheless, we, like most investigators, would
agree that familiarity and recollection are useful summary terms that point to important
differences in phenomenal experience. We would argue, however, that given what we
already know about how the brain works, the usefulness of these concepts for interpreting
and organizing fMRI findings will depend on whether investigators can map them cleanly
Page 39

onto specific processes (i.e., computations or sets of computations carried out by specific
brain areas or orchestrated by networks of areas) that act upon well-defined features or
groups of features (e.g., unitized representations). In particular, for the concepts of
familiarity and recollection (or others, such as strength) to carry interpretive weight with
respect to fMRI findings, a key theoretical and empirical question to be addressed is: What
is the relationship between the type of information that yields the experience of familiarity
and the type of information that yields the experience of recollection? From the SMF point
of view, it is unlikely that familiarity and recollection are based on completely different
types of representations but rather they draw upon the same core types of information in
different ways under different circumstances (see also, e.g., Banks, 2000 for empirical
evidence).
Perhaps the case for recollection is most clear. A sense of recollection arises when fairly
well-differentiated features become available which satisfy task goals that require specific
information. The “strength” of a sense of recollection (and my confidence in the memory)
may then depend on the number and vividness of features that cohere in ways that seem
episodic (e.g., bound together, internally consistent, plausible, different from other
configurations of features).
Familiarity, though, seems more difficult to characterize. Assuming that no one class of
feature (e.g., semantics) is uniquely associated with familiarity but that familiarity may arise
from activation of any feature(s) (semantic, perceptual, emotional, etc.), there appear to be at
least two “senses” in which we experience familiarity. In one sense, it is as if one or more
features are incompletely activated, as if not all processing necessary for a coherent, stable
percept or thought has been completed or successful. Familiarity of this type might be
experienced when one is given degraded stimuli, a speeded recognition test, or is tested
under distraction. In this case, the active information does not have enough definition to
constitute specific features or no specific feature “stands out;” the strength of a familiarity
response (e.g., confidence) may depend on how many different kinds or classes of
information are partially active (or whether only non-featural, information is active, e.g.,
Johnson & Hirst, 1993). In a second sense, we experience something as only familiar if a
feature becomes active in isolation and does not include some additional feature(s) that help
identify the source of the information. Poor binding during encoding, for example, might
lead to a later feeling of familiarity of this type because a feature (e.g., color), no matter how
strongly experienced at test, is not able to co-activate features (e.g., semantic concept,
location, format) that accompanied it in the original experience. In this case, one does not
have enough source-specifying features to differentiate one event from another; the strength
of familiarity (e.g., confidence) depends on the properties (e.g., vividness, fluency) of the
experienced feature. (Of course, a feeling of familiarity could arise from both of these
sources, that is, a single vivid feature accompanied by other incompletely activated features
still might not afford a feeling of recollection.)
Thus, in the first sense one feels that something is familiar but it is not clear exactly what,
whereas in the second sense something in particular is familiar (that face, that idea, that
color). Although in both cases, the experience is relatively undifferentiated (compared to
recollection), either may have functional consequences. The first kind of familiarity provides
a rapid signal that can help guide orienting to either the familiar or the novel, depending on
what is most important (e.g., finding the well-known person you are picking up at an airport
full of strangers vs. finding the new faculty member at a party full of familiar people). The
second provides the cue to reflectively attend to other information that may become active
(e.g., to shift from perceptually attending to the familiar feature to reflectively attending to
activated information that may specify when or where the face, idea, or color were
Page 40

experienced before) or to self-cuing (i.e., retrieving) or to initiating search of external
sources (notes, consulting others).
Of course, even with this level of specificity, interpreting brain activity with respect to
familiarity and recollection could be problematic. As noted above, in laboratory
experiments, semantic features are often viewed as central (e.g., the “item”) and other
features such as format, location, or speaker, are considered as source or contextual features.
Given that content and context are arbitrary, conclusions about brain regions associated with
familiarity and recollection need to avoid the risk of confounding type of feature with type
of subjective experience (see, e.g., Diana et al., 2007; Squire et al., 2007 for similar points).
Equating the “strength” of familiarity and recollection by looking at only the extremes on a
rating scale (e.g., confidence), for example, may not clarify the neural correlates of these
subjective experiences (see also Skinner & Fernandes, 2007). By definition, the experience
of familiarity (no matter how strong) is missing something that the experience of
recollection has (no matter how weak)---specificity, vividness, multiple features. In addition,
recollection no matter how vivid, and familiarity no matter how strong, are not necessarily
veridical.
In conclusion, there is preliminary evidence that sub-regions within MTL, PFC, and
posterior cortex are involved in representing or processing specific source features, whereas
other sub-regions are involved in general processes that act across features. In addition, there
is growing consensus that component processes are shared across different cognitive tasks
(e.g., attention, long and short term memory, decision making). To further advance a
neuroscience of source memory (see Table 2), we need: (a) a better mapping of the specific
brain regions associated with memory for different features and particular combinations of
features that are well-defined (and specification of conditions under which feature
combinations act as a “unit”); (b) systematic studies of how variations in activity in those
regions is related to subjective reports of strength of familiarity and vividness of
recollection; (c) investigation of the conditions (e.g., task set, feature set, context) that
modulate the relations identified in (a) and (b). This approach should not only help us
further specify representational and binding regions (and networks), but also clarify whether
familiarity arises from activity in the same representational regions that are involved in
recollection and whether there is some specific region that cumulates activity (including
sub-recollection activity) from representational regions into a familiarity signal. It should
also help further distinguish the brain regions (networks) where activity is related to the
representation, or processing, of different types of information from regions where activity
is related to relatively general cognitive functions (e.g., refreshing, selecting, evaluating).
A continued two-way interaction between cognitive theory, as illustrated by the SMF, and
evidence from systematic cognitive fMRI studies, including those exploring memory deficits
associated with aging, focal brain damage, and various clinical populations, should help
further clarify our conceptualization of cognitive processes (e.g., feature binding, retrieval,
monitoring), prior knowledge (e.g., categories, scripts, schemas), and specific features (e.g.,
semantic, perceptual, spatial, emotional information), and of how they combine to create
true and false memories.
Acknowledgments
Preparation of this review was supported by NIA grants AG09253 and AG15793. We are grateful to Carol Raye
and Mara Mather for many thoughtful discussions of the issues covered here and comments on an earlier draft. We
thank Kathleen Muller for help organizing references.
Page 41

References
Achim AM, Weiss AP. No evidence for a differential deficit of reality monitoring in schizophrenia: A
meta-analysis of the associative memory literature. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry 2008;13:369–384.
[PubMed: 18781492]
Ackil JK, Zaragoza MS. Memorial consequences of forced confabulation: Age differences in
susceptibility to false memories. Developmental Psychology 1998;34:1358–1372. [PubMed:
9823517]
Addis DR, Moscovitch M, Crawley AP, McAndrews MP. Recollective qualities modulate
hippocampal activation during autobiographical memory retrieval. Hippocampus 2004;14:752–762.
[PubMed: 15318333]
Aggleton JP, Brown MW. Episodic memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal-anterior thalamic axis.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1999;22:425–489. [PubMed: 11301518]
Aleman A, Hijman R, De Haan EHF, Kahn RS. Memory impairment in schizophrenia: a meta-
analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry 1999;156:1358–1366. [PubMed: 10484945]
Allen P, Larøi F, McGuire PK, Aleman A. The hallucinating brain: A review of structural and
functional neuroimaging studies of hallucinations. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews
2008;32:175–191. [PubMed: 17884165]
Anastasi JS, Rhodes MG, Burns MC. Distinguishing between memory illusions and actual memories
using phenomenological measurements and explicit warnings. The American Journal of Psychology
2000;113:1–26. [PubMed: 10742841]
Anderson ND, Ebert PL, Jennings JM, Grady CL, Cabeza R, Graham SJ. Recollection- and
familiarity-based memory in healthy aging and amnestic mild cognitive impairment.
Neuropsychology 2008;22:177–187. [PubMed: 18331160]
Anderson ND, Iidaka T, Cabeza R, Kapur S, McIntosh AR, Craik FIM. The effects of divided
attention on encoding- and retrieval-related brain activity: A PET study of younger and older adults.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2000;12:775–792. [PubMed: 11054920]
Awipi T, Davachi L. Content-specific source encoding in human medial temporal lobe. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2008;34:769–779.
Baddeley A. The episodic buffer: a new component of working memory? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 2000;4:417–423. [PubMed: 11058819]
Badre D, Poldrack RA, Paré-Blagoev EJ, Insler RZ, Wagner AD. Dissociable controlled retrieval and
generalized selection mechanisms in ventrolateral prefrontal cortex. Neuron 2005;47:907–918.
[PubMed: 16157284]
Banks WP. Recognition and source memory as multivariate decision processes. Psychological Science
2000;11:267–273. [PubMed: 11273383]
Bar M, Aminoff E, Schacter DL. Scenes unseen: The parahippocampal cortex intrinsically subserves
contextual associations, not scenes or places per se. The Journal of Neuroscience 2008;28:8539–
8544. [PubMed: 18716212]
Bartlett, FC. Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press; 1932.
Batchelder WH, Riefer DM. Multinomial processing models of source monitoring. Psychological
Review 1990;97:548–564.
Bayen UJ, Murnane K, Erdfelder E. Source discrimination, item detection and multinomial models of
source monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
1996;22:197–215.
Benjamin AS, Craik FIM. Parallel effects of aging and time pressure on memory for source: Evidence
from the spacing effect. Memory & Cognition 2001;29:691–697.
Berryhill ME, Phuong L, Picasso L, Cabeza R, Olson IR. Parietal lobe and episodic memory: Bilateral
damage causes impaired free recall of autobiographical memory. The Journal of Neuroscience
2007;27:14415–14423. [PubMed: 18160649]
Bird CM, Burgess N. The hippocampus and memory: insights from spatial processing. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 2008;9:182–194.
Page 42

Bleich A, Attias J, Furman V. Effect of repeated visual traumatic stimuli on the event related P3 brain
stress disorder potential in post-traumatic stress disorder. International Journal Neuroscience
1996;85:45–55.
Bloise, S. Yale University; 2008. Aging and the subjective experience of remembering. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation
Blumenfeld RS, Ranganath C. Prefrontal cortex and long-term memory encoding: An integrative
review of findings from neuropsychology and neuroimaging. The Neuroscientist 2007;13:280–
291. [PubMed: 17519370]
Botvinick MM, Cohen JD, Carter CS. Conflict monitoring and anterior cingulate cortex: an update.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2004;8:539–546. [PubMed: 15556023]
Botzung A, Denkova E, Ciuciu P, Scheiber C, Manning L. The neural bases of the constructive nature
of autobiographical memories studied with a self-paced fMRI design. Memory 2008;16:351–363.
[PubMed: 18432480]
Boyer PA, Phillips JL, Rousseau FL, Ilivitsky S. Hippocampal abnormalitites and memory deficits:
New evidence of a strong pathophysiological link in schizophrenia. Brain Research Reviews
2007;54:92–112. [PubMed: 17306884]
Bransford, JD.; Johnson, MK. Considerations of some problems of comprehension. In: Chase, W.,
editor. Visual information processing. New York: Academic Press; 1973. p. 383-438.
Brasted PJ, Bussey TJ, Murray EA, Wise SP. Role of the hippocampal system in associative learning
beyond the spatial domain. Brain 2003;126:1202–1223. [PubMed: 12690059]
Braver TS, Barch DM, Kelley WM, Buckner RL, Cohen NJ, Miezin, et al. Direct comparison of
prefrontal cortex regions engaged by working and long-term memory tasks. NeuroImage
2001;14:48–59. [PubMed: 11525336]
Bremner JD. Neuroimaging in posttraumatic stress disorder and other stress-related disorders.
Neuroimaging Clinics of North America 2007;17:523–538. [PubMed: 17983968]
Bremner JD, Krystal JH, Southwick SM, Charney DS. Functional neuroanatomical correlates of the
effects of stress on memory. Journal of Traumatic Stress 1995;8:527–553. [PubMed: 8564272]
Bremner JD, Narayan M. The effects of stress on memory and the hippocampus throughout the life
cycle: Implications for childhood development and aging. Development and Psychopathology
1998;10:871–885. [PubMed: 9886231]
Bremner JD, Vythilingam M, Vermetten E, Southwick SM, McGlashan T, Nazeer A, et al. MRI and
PET study of deficits in hippocampal structure and function in women with childhood sexual
abuse and posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry 2003;160:924–932.
[PubMed: 12727697]
Brewin CR, Kleiner JS, Vasterling JJ, Field AP. Memory for emotionally neutral information in
posttraumatic stress disorder: A meta-analytic investigation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology
2007;116:448–463. [PubMed: 17696700]
Brunelin J, Combris M, Poulet E, Kallel L, D’Amato T, Dalery J, Saoud M. Source monitoring deficits
in hallucinating compared to non-hallucinating patients with schizophrenia. European Psychiatry
2006;21:259–261. [PubMed: 16545546]
Buckner RL, Carroll DC. Self-projection and the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2007;11:49–57.
[PubMed: 17188554]
Buckner RL, Wheeler ME. The cognitive neuroscience of remembering. Nature Reviews Neuroscience
2001;2:624–634.
Budson AE, Sullivan AL, Daffner KR, Schacter DL. Semantic versus phonological false recognition in
aging and Alzheimer's disease. Brain & Cognition 2003;51:251–261. [PubMed: 12727179]
Bunce D. Cognitive support at encoding attenuates age differences in recollective experience among
adults of lower frontal lobe function. Neuropsychology 2003;17:353–361. [PubMed: 12959501]
Bunsey M, Eichenbaum H. Conservation of hippocampal memory function in rats and humans. Nature
1996;379:255–257. [PubMed: 8538790]
Burgess N, Maguire EA, O’Keefe J. The human hippocampus and spatial and episodic memory.
Neuron 2002;35:625–641. [PubMed: 12194864]
Burgess PW, Shallice T. Confabulation and the control of recollection. Memory 1996;4:359–411.
[PubMed: 8817460]
Page 43

Burglen F, Marczewski P, Mitchell KJ, van der Linden M, Johnson MK, Danion J-M, Salamé P.
Impaired performance in a working memory binding task in patients with schizophrenia.
Psychiatry Research 2004;125:247–255. [PubMed: 15051185]
Burianova H, Grady CL. Common and unique neural activations in autobiographical, episodic, and
semantic retrieval. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2007;19:1520–1534. [PubMed: 17714013]
Cabeza R. Hemispheric asymmetry reduction in older adults: The HAROLD model. Psychology and
Aging 2002;17:85–100. [PubMed: 11931290]
Cabeza, R. Prefrontal and medial temporal lobe contributions to relational memory in young and older
adults. In: Zimmer, D.; Mecklinger, A.; Lindenberger, U., editors. Binding in human memory: A
neurocognitive approach. New York: Oxford University Press; 2006. p. 595-626.
Cabeza R. Role of parietal regions in episodic memory retrieval: The dual attentional processes
hypothesis. Neuropsychologia 2008;46:1813–1827. [PubMed: 18439631]
Cabeza R, Anderson ND, Houle S, Mangels JA, Nyberg L. Age-related differences in neural activity
during item and temporal-order memory retrieval: A positron emission tomography study. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience 2000;12:197–206. [PubMed: 10769316]
Cabeza R, Anderson ND, Locantore JK, McIntosh AR. Aging gracefully: Compensatory brain activity
in high-performing older adults. NeuroImage 2002;17:1394–1402. [PubMed: 12414279]
Cabeza R, Ciaramelli E, Olson IR, Moscovitch M. The parietal cortex and episodic memory: an
attentional account. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2008;9:613–625.
Cabeza R, Locantore JK, Anderson ND. Lateralization of prefrontal activity during episodic memory
retrieval: Evidence for the production-monitoring hypothesis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
2003;15:249–259. [PubMed: 12676062]
Cabeza R, Mangels J, Nyberg L, Habib R, Houle S, McIntosh AR, Tulving E. Brain regions
differentially involved in remembering what and when: a PET study. Neuron 1997;19:863–870.
[PubMed: 9354332]
Cabeza R, Prince SE, Daselaar SM, Greenberg DL, Budde M, Dolcos F, LaBar KS, Rubin DC. Brain
activity during episodic retrieval of autobiographical and laboratory events: An fMRI study using
a novel photo paradigm. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2004;16:1583–1594. [PubMed:
15622612]
Cabeza R, Rao SM, Wagner AD, Mayer AR, Schacter DL. Can medial temporal lobe regions
distinguish true from false? An event-related functional MRI study of veridical and illusory
recognition memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2001;98:4805–4810.
Cabeza R, St Jacques P. Functional neuroimaging of autobiographical memory. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 2007;11:219–227. [PubMed: 17382578]
Cahill L, Haier RJ, Fallon J, Alkire MT, Tang C, Keator D, et al. Amygdala activity at encoding
correlated with long-term, free recall of emotional information. Proceedings for the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996;93:8016–8021.
Canli T, Zhao Z, Brewer J, Gabrieli JDE, Cahill L. Event-related activation in the human amygdala
associates with later memory for individual emotional experience. The Journal of Neuroscience
2000;20:1–5. [PubMed: 10627575]
Canli T, Zhao Z, Desmond JE, Glover G, Gabrieli JDE. fMRI identifies a network of structures
correlated with retention of positive and negative emotional memory. Psychobiology
1999;27:441–452.
Cansino S, Maquet P, Dolan RJ, Rugg MD. Brain activity underlying encoding and retrieval of source
memory. Cerebral Cortex 2002;12:1049–1056.
Cavanna AE, Trimble MR. The precuneus: A review of its functional anatomy and behavioural
correlates. Brain 2006;129:564–583. [PubMed: 16399806]
Chalfonte BL, Johnson MK. Feature memory and binding in young and older adults. Memory &
Cognition 1996;24:403–416.
Chee MWL, Goh JOS, Venkatraman V, Tan JC, Gutchess A, Sutton B, Hebrank A, Leshikar E, Park
D. Age-related changes in object processing and contextual binding revealed using fMRI
adaptation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2006;18:495–507. [PubMed: 16768356]
Christianson, S-Å., editor. The handbook of emotion and memory: Research and theory. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1992.
Page 44

Ciaramelli E, Grady CL, Moscovitch M. Top-down and bottom-up attention to memory: A hypothesis
(AtoM) on the role of the posterior parietal cortex in memory retrieval. Neuropsychologia
2008;46:1828–1851. [PubMed: 18471837]
Ciaramelli, E.; Spaniol, J. Ventromedial prefrontal damage and confabulation impair source but not
associative memory. 2008. Manuscript under review.
Cohen, NJ.; Eichenbaum, H. Memory, amnesia, and the hippocampal system. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press; 1993.
Comblain C, D'Argembeau A, Van der Linden M. Phenomenal characteristics of autobiographical
memories for emotional and neutral events in older and younger adults. Experimental Aging
Research 2005;31:173–189. [PubMed: 15981795]
Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience 2002;3:201–215.
Craik FIM, Morris LW, Morris RG, Loewen ER. Relations between source amnesia and frontal lobe
functioning in older adults. Psychology & Aging 1990;5:148–151. [PubMed: 2317296]
Cunningham WA, Johnson MK, Raye CL, Gatenby JC, Gore JC, Banaji MR. Separable neural
components in the processing of black and white faces. Psychological Science 2004;15:806–813.
[PubMed: 15563325]
Danion J-M, Huron C, Vidailhet P, Berna F. Functional mechanisms of episodic memory impairment
in schizophrenia. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 2007;52:693–701.
Danion J-M, Rizzo L, Bruant A. Functional mechanisms underlying impaired recognition memory and
conscious awareness in patients with schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 1999;56:639–
644. [PubMed: 10401510]
Daselaar, S.; Cabeza, R. Episodic memory decline and healthy aging. In: Byrne, J.; Eichenbaum, H.,
editors. Memory systems. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol. 3. Oxford:
Elsevier; 2008. p. 577-599.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Daselaar SM, Fleck MS, Dobbins IG, Madden DJ, Cabeza R. Effects of healthy aging on hippocampal
and rhinal memory functions: An event-related fMRI study. Cerebral Cortex 2006;16:1771–1782.
[PubMed: 16421332]
Daselaar SM, Rice HJ, Greenberg DL, Cabeza R, LaBar KS, Rubin DC. The spatiotemporal dynamics
of autobiographical memory: Neural correlates of recall, emotional intensity, and reliving.
Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:217–229. [PubMed: 17548799]
Davachi L. Item, context and relational episodic encoding in humans. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology 2006;16:693–700. [PubMed: 17097284]
Davachi L, Dobbins IG. Declarative memory. Current Directions in Psychological Science
2008;17:112–118. [PubMed: 20011622]
Davis SW, Dennis NA, Daselaar SM, Fleck MS, Cabeza R. Que PASA? The Posterior-Anterior Shift
in Aging. Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:1201–1209. [PubMed: 17925295]
Deese J. On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 1959;58:17–22. [PubMed: 13664879]
Degl’Innocenti A, Backman L. Source memory in major depression. Journal of Affective Disorders
1999;54:205–209. [PubMed: 10403166]
Dennis, NA.; Cabeza, R. Neuroimaging of healthy cognitive aging. In: Craik, FIM.; Salthouse, TA.,
editors. Handbook of aging and cognition: Third edition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2008. p. 1-54.
Dennis NA, Hayes SM, Prince SE, Madden DJ, Huettel SA, Cabeza R. Effects of aging on the neural
correlates of successful item and source memory encoding. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2008;34:791–808.
Dennis NA, Kim H, Cabeza R. Effects of aging on true and false memory formation: An fMRI study.
Neuropsychologia 2007;45:3157–3166. [PubMed: 17716696]
Dennis NA, Kim H, Cabeza R. Age-related differences in brain activity during true and false memory
retrieval. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2008;20:1390–1402. [PubMed: 18303982]
Dewhurst SA, Holmes SJ, Brandt KR, Dean GM. Measuring the speed of the conscious components of
recognition memory: Remembering is faster than knowing. Consciousness and Cognition
2006;15:147–162. [PubMed: 16019226]
Page 45

Diana RA, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C. Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal
lobe: a three-component model. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2007;11:379–386. [PubMed:
17707683]
Diana RA, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C. The effects of unitization on familiarity-based source
memory: Testing a behavioral prediction derived from neuroimaging data. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 2008;34:730–740.
Ditman T, Kuperberg GR. A source-monitoring account of auditory verbal hallucinations in patients
with schizophrenia. Harvard Review of Psychiatry 2005;13:280–299. [PubMed: 16251167]
Dobbins IG, Foley H, Schacter DL, Wagner AD. Executive control during episodic retrieval: Multiple
prefrontal processes subserve source memory. Neuron 2002;35:989–996. [PubMed: 12372291]
Dobbins IG, Han S. Cue-versus probe-dependent prefrontal cortex activity during contextual
remembering. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2006;18:1439–1452. [PubMed: 16989546]
Dobbins IG, Rice HJ, Wagner AD, Schacter DL. Memory orientation and success: separable
neurocognitive components underlying episodic recognition. Neuropsychologia 2003;41:318–333.
[PubMed: 12457757]
Dobbins IG, Wagner AD. Domain-general and domain-sensitive prefrontal mechanisms for
recollecting events and detecting novelty. Cerebral Cortex 2005;15:1768–1778. [PubMed:
15728740]
Dodson CS, Holland PW, Shimamura AP. On the recollection of specific-and partial-source
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
1998;24:1121–1136.
Dodson CS, Schacter DL. "If I had said it I would have remembered it": Reducing false memories with
a distinctiveness heuristic. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2001;8:155–161. [PubMed:
11340861]
Dolan RJ, Lane R, Chua P, Fletcher P. Dissociable temporal lobe activations during emotional
episodic memory retrieval. NeuroImage 2000;11:203–209. [PubMed: 10694462]
Dolcos F, LaBar KS, Cabeza R. Interaction between the amygdala and the medial temporal lobe
memory system predicts better memory for emotional events. Neuron 2004;42:855–863. [PubMed:
15182723]
Dolcos F, LaBar KS, Cabeza R. Remembering one year later: Role of the amygdala and the medial
temporal lobe memory system in retrieving emotional memories. Proceedings for the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2005;102:2626–2631.
Dolcos, F.; LaBar, KS.; Cabeza, R. The memory enhancing effect of emotion: Functional
neuroimaging evidence. In: Uttl, B.; Ohta, H.; Seigenthaler, AL., editors. Memory and emotion:
Interdisciplinary perspectives. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing; 2006. p. 107-133.
Dougal S, Phelps EA, Davachi L. The role of medial temporal lobe in item recognition and source
recollection of emotional stimuli. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2007;7:233–
242.
Driscoll I, Hamilton DA, Petropoulos H, Yeo RA, Brooks WM, Baumgartner RN, Sutherland RJ. The
aging hippocampus: Cognitive, biochemical and structural findings. Cerebral Cortex
2003;13:1344–1351. [PubMed: 14615299]
Duarte A, Henson RN, Graham KS. The effects of aging on the neural correlates of subjective and
objective recollection. Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:2169–2180. [PubMed: 18165281]
Duarte A, Ranganath C, Knight RT. Effects of unilateral prefrontal lesions on familiarity, recollection,
and source memory. Journal of Neuroscience 2005;25:8333–8337. [PubMed: 16148241]
Dudukovic NM, Wagner AD. Goal-dependent modulation of declarative memory: Neural correlates of
temporal recency decisions and novelty detection. Neuropsychologia 2007;45:2608–2620.
[PubMed: 17499318]
Durso FT, Johnson MK. The effects of orienting tasks on recognition, recall, and modality confusion
of pictures and words. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 1980;19:416–429.
Duverne S, Habibi A, Rugg MD. Regional specificity of age effects on the neural correlates of
episodic retrieval. Neurobiology of Aging 2008;29:1902–1916. [PubMed: 17560691]
Dywan J, Segalowitz SJ, Arsenault A. Electrophysiological response during source memory decisions
in older and younger adults. Brain and Cognition 2002;49:322–340. [PubMed: 12139957]
Page 46

Easterbrook JA. The effect of emotion on cue utilization and the organization of behavior.
Psychological Review 1959;66:183–201. [PubMed: 13658305]
Eich, E.; Geraerts, E.; Schooler, JW.; Forgas, JP. Memory in and about affect. In: Byrne, J.; Roediger,
HL., III, editors. Cognitive psychology of memory. Learning and memory: A comprehensive
reference. Vol. Vol. 2. Oxford: Elsevier; 2008. p. 239-260.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Eichenbaum, H. The hippocampal system and declarative memory in humans and animals:
Experimental analysis and historical origins. In: Schacter, DL.; Tulving, E., editors. Memory
systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1994. p. 147-202.
Eichenbaum, H.; Fortin, N.; Ergorul, C.; Robitsek, J. Toward a neurobiology of episodic memory. In:
Huston, JP.; Dere, E.; Easton, A.; Nadel, L.; Huston, JP., editors. Handbook of behavioral
neuroscience, Vol. 18, Handbook of episodic memory. The Netherlands: Elsevier; 2008. p.
283-300.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Eds.)
Eichenbaum H, Lipton PA. Towards a functional organization of the medial temporal lobe memory
system: Role of the parahippocampal and medial entorhinal cortical areas. Hippocampus
2008;18:1314–1324. [PubMed: 19021265]
Eichenbaum H, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C. The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory.
Annual Review of Neuroscience 2007;30:123–152.
Eldridge LL, Engel SA, Zeineh MM, Bookheimer SY, Knowlton BJ. A dissociation of encoding and
retrieval processes in the human hippocampus. The Journal of Neuroscience 2005;25:3280–3286.
[PubMed: 15800182]
Elfman KW, Parks CM, Yonelinas AP. Testing a neurocomputational model of recollection,
familiarity, and source recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 2008;34:752–768.
Epstein R, Kanwisher N. A cortical representation of the local visual environment. Nature
1998;392:598–601. [PubMed: 9560155]
Erk S, Martin S, Walter H. Emotional context during encoding of neutral items modulates brain
activation not only during encoding but also during recognition. NeuroImage 2005;26:829–838.
[PubMed: 15955493]
Fenker DB, Schott BH, Richardson-Klavehn A, Heinze H-J, Duzel E. Recapitulating emotional
context: activity of amygdala, hippocampus and fusiform cortex during recollection and
familiarity. European Journal of Neuroscience 2005;21:1993–1999. [PubMed: 15869492]
Fichtenholtz, H.; Qin, JJ.; Mitchell, KJ.; Johnson, DC.; Southwick, SM.; Johnson, MK., et al. PTSD
patients' memory for neutral pictures in blocked and intermixed lists. Presented at the Annual
Meeting of the Association for Psychological Science; Chicago, IL. 2008 May.
Finke RA, Johnson MK, Shyi GC-W. Memory confusions for real and imagined completions of
symmetrical visual patterns. Memory & Cognition 1988;16:133–137.
Fleck MS, Daselaar SM, Dobbins IG, Cabeza R. Role of prefrontal and anterior cingulate regions in
decision-making processes shared by memory and nonmemory tasks. Cerebral Cortex
2006;16:1623–1630. [PubMed: 16400154]
Fotopoulou A, Conway MA, Solms M. Confabulation: Motivated reality monitoring.
Neuropsychologia 2007;45:2180–2190. [PubMed: 17428509]
Friedman D, Johnson RJ. Event-Related Potential (ERP) studies of memory encoding and retrieval: A
selective review. Microscopy Research and Technique 2000;51:6–28. [PubMed: 11002349]
Gallo DA, Weiss JA, Schacter DL. Reducing false recognition with criterial recollection tests:
Distinctiveness heuristic versus criterion shifts. Journal of Memory and Language 2004;51:473–
493.
Ganis G, Thompson WL, Kosslyn SM. Brain areas underlying visual mental imagery and visual
perception: an fMRI study. Cognitive Brain Research 2004;20:226–241. [PubMed: 15183394]
Gardiner, JM. Remembering and knowing. In: Byrne, J.; Roediger, HL., III, editors. Cognitive
psychology of memory. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol. 2. Oxford:
Elsevier; 2008. p. 285-306.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Gardiner, JM.; Richardson-Klavehn, A. Remembering and knowing. In: Tulving, E.; Craik, FIM.,
editors. The Oxford handbook of memory. New York: Oxford University Press; 2000. p.
229-244.
Page 47

Garoff RJ, Slotnick SD, Schacter DL. The neural origins of specific and general memory: the role of
the fusiform cortex. Neuropsychologia 2005;43:847–859. [PubMed: 15716157]
Garoff-Eaton RJ, Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. The neural correlates of conceptual and perceptual false
recognition. Learning & Memory 2007;14:684–692. [PubMed: 17911372]
Garoff-Eaton RJ, Slotnick SD, Schacter DL. Not all false memories are created equal: The neural basis
of false recognition. Cerebral Cortex 2006;16:1645–1652. [PubMed: 16400158]
Geuze E, Vermetten E, Ruf M, de Kloet CS, Westenberg HGM. Neural correlates of associative
learning and memory in veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research 2008;42:659–669. [PubMed: 17698081]
Gilboa A, Winocur G, Grady CL, Hevenor SJ, Moscovitch M. Remembering our past: Functional
neuroanatomy of recollection of recent and very remote personal events. Cerebral Cortex
2004;14:1214–1225. [PubMed: 15166099]
Giovanello KS, Schnyer D, Verfaellie M. Distinct hippocampal regions make unique contributions to
relational memory. Hippocampus 2009;19:111–117. [PubMed: 18727049]
Giovanello KS, Verfaellie M, Keane MM. Disproportionate deficit in associative recognition relative
to item recognition in global amnesia. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience
2003;3:186–194.
Glanzer M, Hilford A, Kim K. Six regularities of source recognition. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2004;30:1176–1195.
Glisky EL, Kong LL. Do young and older adults rely on different processes in source memory tasks?
A neuropsychological study. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 2008;34:809–822.
Glisky EL, Polster MR, Routhieaux BC. Double dissociation between item and source memory.
Neuropsychology 1995;9:229–235.
Glisky EL, Rubin SR, Davidson PSR. Source memory in older adults: An encoding or retrieval
problem? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2001;27:1131–1146.
Gold JJ, Hopkins RO, Squire LR. Single-item memory, associative memory, and the human
hippocampus. Learning & Memory 2006;13:644–649. [PubMed: 16980546]
Gold JJ, Smith CN, Bayley PJ, Shrager Y, Brewer JB, Stark CEL, et al. Item memory, source memory,
and the medial temporal lobe: Concordant findings from fMRI and memory-impaired patients.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2006;103:9351–9356.
Goldin PR, McRae K, Ramel W, Gross JJ. The neural bases of emotion regulation: Reappraisal and
suppression of negative emotion. Biological Psychiatry 2008;63:577–586. [PubMed: 17888411]
Golier J, Harvey P, Steiner A, Yehuda R. Source monitoring in PTSD. Annals of the New York
Academy of Science 1997;821:472–475.
Golomb J, Kluger A, de Leon MJ, Ferris SH, Mittelman M, Cohen J, et al. Hippocampal formation
size predicts declining memory performance in normal aging. Neurology 1996;47:810–813.
[PubMed: 8797485]
Gonsalves B, Reber PJ, Gitelman DR, Parrish TB, Mesulam M-M, Paller KA. Neural evidence that
vivid imagining can lead to false remembering. Psychological Science 2004;15:655–660.
[PubMed: 15447635]
Gordon R, Franklin N, Beck J. Wishful thinking and source monitoring. Memory & Cognition
2005;33:418–429.
Grady CL. Cognitive neuroscience of aging. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
2008;1124:127–144. [PubMed: 18400928]
Grady CL, McIntosh AR, Horwitz B, Maisog JM, Ungerleider LG, Mentis MJ, et al. Age-related
reductions in human recognition memory due to impaired encoding. Science 1995;269:218–221.
[PubMed: 7618082]
Grady CL, Yu H, Alain C. Age-related differences in brain activity underlying working memory for
spatial and nonspatial auditory information. Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:189–199. [PubMed:
17494060]
Page 48

Greenberg DL, Rice HJ, Cooper JJ, Cabeza R, Rubin DC, LaBar KS. Co-activation of the amygdala,
hippocampus and inferior frontal gyrus during autobiographical memory retrieval.
Neuropsychologia 2005;43:659–674. [PubMed: 15721179]
Gronlund SD, Edwards MB, Ohrt DD. Comparison of the retrieval of item versus spatial position
information. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
1997;23:1261–1274.
Gruppuso V, Lindsay DS, Kelley CM. The process-dissociation procedure and similarity: Defining
and estimating recollection and familiarity in recognition memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1997;23:259–278.
Gutchess AH, Welsh RC, Hedden T, Bangert A, Minear M, Liu LL, et al. Aging and the neural
correlates of successful picture encoding: Frontal activations compensate for decreased medial-
temporal activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2005;17:84–96. [PubMed: 15701241]
Guerin SA, Miller MB. Semantic organization of study materials has opposite effects on recognition
and recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2008;15:302–308. [PubMed: 18488644]
Haas BW, Canli T. Emotional memory function, personality structure and psychopathology: A neural
system approach to the identification of vulnerability markers. Brain Research Reviews
2008;58:71–84. [PubMed: 18359090]
Habib R, Nyberg L, Tulving E. Hemispheric asymmetries of memory: the HERA model revisited.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2003;7:241–245. [PubMed: 12804689]
Hadjikhani N, Roland PE. Cross-modal transfer of information between the tactile and the visual
representations in the human brain: A positron emission tomographic study. The Journal of
Neuroscience 1998;18:1072–1084. [PubMed: 9437027]
Hamann S, Canli T. Individual differences in emotion processing. Current Opinions in Neurobiology
2004;14:233–238.
Hamann SB, Ely TD, Grafton ST, Kilts CD. Amygdala activity related to enhanced memory for
pleasant and aversive stimuli. Nature Neuroscience 1999;2:289–293.
Hamilton JP, Gotlib IH. Neural substrates of increased memory sensitivity for negative stimuli in
major depression. Society of Biological Psychiatry 2008;63:1155–1162.
Hannula DE, Tranel D, Cohen NJ. The long and the short of it: Relational memory impairments in
amnesia, even at short lags. The Journal of Neuroscience 2006;26:8352–8359. [PubMed:
16899730]
Hasher, L.; Lustig, C.; Zacks, R. Inhibitory mechanisms and the control of attention. In: Conway,
ARA.; Jarrold, C.; Kane, MJ.; Miyake, A.; Towse, JN., editors. Variation in working memory.
New York: Oxford University Press; 2007. p. 227-249.
Hasher, L.; Zacks, RT. Working memory, comprehension, and aging: A review and a new view. In:
Bower, GH., editor. The psychology of learning and motivation. Vol. Vol. 22. New York:
Academic Press; 1988. p. 193-225.
Hashtroudi S, Johnson MK, Chrosniak LD. Aging and qualitative characteristics of memories for
perceived and imagined complex events. Psychology and Aging 1990;5:119–126. [PubMed:
2317290]
Haskins AL, Yonelinas AP, Quamme JR, Ranganath C. Perirhinal cortex supports encoding and
familiarity-based recognition of novel associations. Neuron 2008;59:554–560. [PubMed:
18760692]
Hassabis D, Maguire EA. Deconstructing episodic memory with construction. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 2007;11:299–306. [PubMed: 17548229]
Hayama HR, Johnson JD, Rugg MD. The relationship between the right frontal old/new ERP effect
and post-retrieval monitoring: Specific or non-specific? Neuropsychologia 2008;46:1211–1223.
[PubMed: 18234241]
Healy MR, Light LL, Chung C. Dual-process models of associative recognition in young and older
adults: Evidence from receiver operating characteristics. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2005;31:768–788.
Hekkanen ST, McEvoy C. False memories and source-monitoring problems: Criterion differences.
Applied Cognitive Psychology 2002;16:73–85.
Page 49

Henke K, Buck A, Weber B, Wieser HG. Human hippocampus establishes associations in memory.
Hippocampus 1997;7:249–256. [PubMed: 9228523]
Henke K, Weber B, Kneifel S, Wieser HG, Buck A. Human hippocampus associates information in
memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
1999;96:5884–5889. [PubMed: 10318979]
Henkel LA, Franklin N, Johnson MK. Cross-modal source monitoring confusions between perceived
and imagined events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2000;26:321–335.
Henkel LA, Johnson MK, De Leonardis DM. Aging and source monitoring: Cognitive processes and
neuropsychological correlates. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 1998;127:251–268.
[PubMed: 9742716]
Henson R. A mini-review of fMRI studies of human medial temporal lobe activity associated with
recognition memory. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 2005;58B:340–360.
[PubMed: 16194973]
Henson RNA, Shallice T, Dolan RJ. Right prefrontal cortex and episodic memory retrieval: a
functional MRI test of the monitoring hypothesis. Brain 1999;122:1367–1381. [PubMed:
10388802]
Hertel, PT. Emotion, mood and memory. In: Squire, L., editor. Encyclopedia of learning and memory.
New York: Macmillan; 1992. p. 157-161.
Hertel, PT. The cognitive-initiative account of depression-related impairments in memory. In: Medin,
D., editor. The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research theory. Vol. Vol.
39. San Diego: Academic Press; 2000. p. 47-71.
Higgins, JA.; Johnson, MK. Unconscious competition can impair basic reflective processing of
consciously experienced items. Yale University; 2008. Manuscript in preparation
Hilford A, Glanzer M, Kim K, DeCarlo LT. Regularities of source recognition: ROC analysis. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General 2002;131:494–510. [PubMed: 12500860]
Hintzman DL, Caulton DA, Levitin DJ. Retrieval dynamics in recognition and list discrimination:
Further evidence of separate processes of familiarity and recall. Memory & Cognition
1998;26:449–462.
Hoffman RE. Auditory/verbal hallucinations, speech perception neurocircuitry, and the social
deafferentation hypothesis. Clinical EEG & Neuroscience: Official Journal of the EEG &
Clinical Neuroscience Society (ENCS) 2008;39:87–90. [PubMed: 18450175]
Hoffman RE, Hampson M, Wu K, Anderson AW, Gore JC, Buchanan RJ, et al. Probing the
pathophysiology of auditory/verbal hallucinations by combining functional magnetic resonance
imaging and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Cerebral Cortex 2007;17:2733–2743. [PubMed:
17298962]
Hornberger M, Rugg MD, Henson RNA. fMRI correlates of retrieval orientation. Neuropsychologia
2006;44:1425–1436. [PubMed: 16480749]
Hyman IE, Pentland J. The role of mental imagery in the creation of false childhood memories. Journal
of Memory and Language 1996;35:101–117.
Jacoby LL. A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language 1991;30:513–541.
Jacoby LL, Bishara AJ, Hessels S, Toth JP. Aging, subjective experience, and cognitive control:
Dramatic false remembering by older adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
2005;134:131–148. [PubMed: 15869342]
Jacoby LL, Kelley C, Brown J, Jasechko J. Becoming famous overnight: Limits on the ability to avoid
unconscious influences of the past. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1989;56:326–
338.
Jennings JM, Jacoby LL. An opposition procedure for detecting age-related deficits in recollection:
Telling effects of repetition. Psychology and Aging 1997;12:352–361. [PubMed: 9189995]
Johnson JD, Rugg MD. Recollection and the reinstatement of encoding-related cortical activity.
Cerebral Cortex 2007;17:2507–2515. [PubMed: 17204822]
Johnson, MK. Discriminating the origin of information. In: Oltmanns, TF.; Maher, BA., editors.
Delusional beliefs. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1988. p. 34-65.
Page 50

Johnson, MK. Reality monitoring: Evidence from confabulation in organic brain disease patients. In:
Prigatano, GP.; Schacter, DL., editors. Awareness of deficit after brain injury. New York: Oxford
University Press; 1991. p. 176-197.
Johnson MK. MEM: Mechanisms of recollection. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1992;4:268–280.
Johnson, MK. Identifying the origin of mental experience. In: Myslobodsky, MS., editor. The
mythomanias: The nature of deception and self-deception. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 1997a. p.
133-180.
Johnson MK. Source monitoring and memory distortion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London 1997b;352:1733–1745. [PubMed: 9415926]
Johnson MK. The relation between source memory and episodic memory: Comment on Siedlecki et al.
(2005). Psychology and Aging 2005;20:529–531. [PubMed: 16248712]
Johnson MK. Memory and Reality. American Psychologist 2006;61:760–771. [PubMed: 17115808]
Johnson MK, Bransford JD, Solomon SK. Memory for tacit implications of sentences. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 1973;98:203–205.
Johnson, MK.; Chalfonte, BL. Binding complex memories: The role of reactivation and the
hippocampus. In: Schacter, DL.; Tulving, E., editors. Memory systems 1994. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press; 1994. p. 311-350.
Johnson MK, Foley MA, Suengas AG, Raye CL. Phenomenal characteristics of memories for
perceived and imagined autobiographical events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
1988;117:371–376. [PubMed: 2974863]
Johnson MK, Hashtroudi S, Lindsay DS. Source Monitoring. Psychological Bulletin 1993;114:3–28.
[PubMed: 8346328]
Johnson, MK.; Hayes, SM.; D'Esposito, M.; Raye, CL. Confabulation. In: Boller, F.; Grafman, J.,
editors. Handbook of neuropsychology. Memory and its disorders. 2nd ed.. Vol. Vol. 2.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science; 2000. p. 383-407.
Johnson, MK.; Hirst, W. MEM: Memory subsystems as processes. In: Collins, AF.; Gathercole, SE.;
Conway, MA.; Morris, PE., editors. Theories of memory. East Sussex England: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates; 1993. p. 241-286.
Johnson MK, Kounios J, Nolde SF. Electrophysiological brain activity and memory source
monitoring. NeuroReport 1997;7:2929–2932. [PubMed: 9116212]
Johnson MK, Kounios J, Reeder JA. Time-course studies of reality monitoring and recognition.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1994;20:1409–1419.
Johnson MK, Mitchell KJ, Raye CL, McGuire JT, Sanislow CA. Mental rubbernecking to negative
information depends on task context. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2006;13:614–618.
[PubMed: 17201360]
Johnson, MK.; Multhaup, KS. Emotion and MEM. In: Christianson, S-A., editor. The handbook of
emotion and memory: Current research and theory. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates;
1992. p. 33-66.
Johnson MK, Nolde SF, De Leonardis DM. Emotional focus and source monitoring. Journal of
Memory and Language 1996;35:135–156.
Johnson MK, Nolde SF, Mather M, Kounios J, Schacter DL, Curran T. The similarity of brain activity
associated with true and false recognition depends on test format. Psychological Science
1997;8:250–257.
Johnson MK, O'Connor M, Cantor J. Confabulation, memory deficits, and frontal dysfunction. Brain
and Cognition 1997;34:189–206. [PubMed: 9220085]
Johnson MK, Raye CL. Reality monitoring. Psychological Review 1981;88:67–85.
Johnson, MK.; Raye, CL. Cognitive and brain mechanisms of false memories and beliefs. In: Schacter,
DL.; Scarry, E., editors. Memory and belief. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 2000. p.
35-86.
Johnson MK, Raye CL, Mitchell KJ, Greene EJ, Cunningham WA, Sanislow CA. Using fMRI to
investigate a component process of reflection: Prefrontal correlates of refreshing a just-activated
representation. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2005;5:339–361.
Page 51

Johnson MK, Raye CL, Mitchell KJ, Touryan SR, Greene EJ, Nolen-Hoeksema S. Dissociating medial
frontal and posterior cingulate activity during self-reflection. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience 2006;1:56–64. [PubMed: 18574518]
Johnson MK, Verfaellie M, Dunlosky J. Introduction to the special section on integrative approaches
to source memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition
2008;34:727–729.
Jonides J, Lewis RL, Nee DE, Lustig CA, Berman MG, Moore KS. The mind and brain of short-term
memory. Annual Review of Psychology 2008;59:193–224.
Kahn I, Andrews-Hanna JR, Vincent JL, Snyder AZ, Buckner RL. Distinct cortical anatomy linked to
subregions of the medial temporal lobe revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity. Journal of
Neurophysiology 2008;100:129–139. [PubMed: 18385483]
Kahn I, Davachi L, Wagner AD. Functional-neuroanatomic correlates of recollection: Implications for
models of recognition memory. The Journal of Neuroscience 2004;24:4172–4180. [PubMed:
15115812]
Kanwisher N, McDermott J, Chun MM. The fusiform face area: A module in human extrastriate cortex
specialized for face perception. The Journal of Neuroscience 1997;17:4302–4311. [PubMed:
9151747]
Karpel ME, Hoyer WJ, Toglia MP. Accuracy and qualities of real and suggested memories:
Nonspecific age differences. Journals of Gerontology Series B-Psychological Sciences & Social
Sciences 2001;56B:103–110.
Kaszniak, AW.; Newman, MC. Toward a neuropsychology of cognitive aging. In: Qualls, SH.;
Abeles, N., editors. Psychology and the aging revolution: How we adapt to longer life.
Washington, DC, US: American Psychological Association; 2000. p. 43-67.
Kelley, CM.; Jacoby, LL. Recollection and familiarity: Process-dissociation. In: Tulving, E.; Craik,
FIM., editors. The Oxford handbook of memory. New York: Oxford University Press; 2000. p.
215-228.
Kelley CM, Sahakyan L. Memory, monitoring, and control in the attainment of memory accuracy.
Journal of Memory and Language 2003;48:704–721.
Kelley WM, Macrae CN, Wyland CL, Caglar S, Inati S, Heatherton TF. Finding the self? An event-
related fMRI study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2002;14:785–794. [PubMed: 12167262]
Kelley WL, Miezin FM, McDermott K, Buckner RL, Raichle ME, Cohen NJ, Petersen SE.
Hemispheric specialization in human dorsal frontal cortex and medial temporal lobes for verbal
and nonverbal memory encoding. Neuron 1998;20:927–936. [PubMed: 9620697]
Kensinger EA. Negative emotion enhances memory: Accuracy behavioral and neuroimaging evidence.
Current Directions in Psychological Science 2007;16:213–218.
Kensinger EA. How emotion affects older adults' memories for event details. Memory. (in press).
Kensinger EA, Clarke RJ, Corkin S. What neural correlates underlie successful encoding and retrieval?
A functional magnetic resonance imaging study using a divided attention paradigm. Journal of
Neuroscience 2003;23:2407–2415. [PubMed: 12657700]
Kensinger EA, Corkin S. Two routes to emotional memory: Distinct neural processes for valence and
arousal. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2004;101:3310–3315.
Kensinger, EA.; Corkin, S. Amnesia: point and counterpoint. In: Byrne, J.; Menzel, R., editors.
Learning theory and behavior. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol. 1.
Oxford: Elsevier; 2008. p. 259-286.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Kensinger EA, Garoff-Eaton RJ, Schacter DL. How negative emotion enhances the visual specificity
of a memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2007;19:1872–1887. [PubMed: 17958489]
Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. Retrieving accurate and distorted memories: Neuroimaging evidence for
effects of emotion. NeuroImage 2005a;27:167–177. [PubMed: 15919215]
Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. Emotional content and reality-monitoring ability: fMRI evidence for the
influences of encoding processes. Neuropsychologia 2005b;43:1429–1443. [PubMed: 15989934]
Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. Amygdala activity is associated with the successful encoding of item, but
not source, information for positive and negative stimuli. The Journal of Neuroscience
2006;26:2564–2570. [PubMed: 16510734]
Page 52

Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. Remembering the specific visual details of presented objects:
Neuroimaging evidence for effects of emotion. Neuropsychologia 2007;45:2951–2962.
[PubMed: 17631361]
Kensinger, EA.; Schacter, DL. Memory and emotion. In: Lewis, M.; Haviland-Jones, JM.; Barrett,
LF., editors. The handbook of emotions, 3rd Edition. New York: Guilford; 2008a. p. 601-617.
Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. Neural processes supporting young and olsder adults' emotional
memories. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2008b;20:1161–1173. [PubMed: 18284340]
Kim H, Cabeza R. Differential contributions of prefrontal, medial temporal, and sensory-perceptual
regions to true and false memory formation. Cerebral Cortex 2007a;17:2143–2150. [PubMed:
17110592]
Kim H, Cabeza R. Trusting our memories: Dissociating the neural correlates of confidence in veridical
versus illusory memories. The Journal of Neuroscience 2007b;27:12190–12197. [PubMed:
17989285]
Kintsch W. Recognition and free recall of organized lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology
1968;78:481–487.
Kirchhoff BA, Wagner AD, Maril A, Stern CE. Prefrontal-temporal circuitry for episodic encoding
and subsequent memory. The Journal of Neuroscience 2000;20:6173–6180. [PubMed:
10934267]
Kirwan CB, Jones CK, Miller MI, Stark CEL. High-resolution fMRI investigation of the medial
temporal lobe. Human Brain Mapping 2007;28:959–966. [PubMed: 17133381]
Kirwan CB, Stark CEL. Overcoming interference: An fMRI investigation of pattern separation in the
medial temporal lobe. Learning & Memory 2007;14:625–633. [PubMed: 17848502]
Kirwan CB, Wixted JT, Squire LR. Activity in the medial temporal lobe predicts memory strength,
whereas activity in the prefrontal cortex predicts recollection. The Journal of Neuroscience
2008;28:10541–10548. [PubMed: 18923030]
Knight M, Seymour TL, Gaunt JT, Baker C, Nesmith K, Mather M. Aging and goal-directed
emotional attention: Distraction reverses emotional biases. Emotion 2007;7:705–714. [PubMed:
18039037]
Kohler S, Paus T, Buckner RL, Milner B. Effects of left inferior prefrontal stimulation on episodic
memory formation: A two-stage fMRI–rTMS Study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
2004;16:178–188. [PubMed: 15068590]
Konishi S, Uchida I, Okuaki T, Machida T, Shirouzu I, Miyashita Y. Neural correlates of recency
judgment. The Journal of Neuroscience 2002;22:9549–9555. [PubMed: 12417679]
Kroll NEA, Knight RT, Metcalfe J, Wolf ES, Tulving E. Cohesion failure as a source of memory
illusions. Journal of Memory and Language 1996;35:176–196.
Kumaran D, Maguire EA. Novelty signals: a window into hippocampal information processing.
Trending in Cognitive Sciences 2009;13:47–54.
Kuskowski MA, Pardo JV. The role of the fusiform gyrus in successful encoding of face stimuli.
NeuroImage 1999;9:599–610. [PubMed: 10334903]
Lampinen JM, Meier CR, Arnal JD, Leding JK. Compelling untruths: Content borrowing and vivid
false memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2005;31:954–963.
Lepage M, Ghaffar O, Nyberg L, Tulving E. Prefrontal cortex and episodic memory retrieval mode.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2000;97:506–
511. [PubMed: 10618448]
Lepage M, Habib R, Tulving E. Hippocampal PET activations of memory encoding and retrieval: The
HIPER model. Hippocampus 1998;8:313–322. [PubMed: 9744418]
Lepage M, Montoya A, Pelletier M, Achim AM, Menear M, Lal S. Associative memory encoding and
recognition schizophrenia: An event-related fMRI study. Biological Psychiatry 2006;60:1215–
1223. [PubMed: 16814264]
Leynes PA, Phillips MC. Event-related Potential (ERP) evidence for varied recollection during source
monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2008;34:741–751.
Page 53

Li S-C, Naveh-Benjamin M, Lindenberger U. Aging neuromodulation impairs associative binding: A
neurocomputational account. Psychological Science 2005;16:445–450. [PubMed: 15943670]
Liberzon I, Sripada CS. The functional neuroanatomy of PTSD: a critical review. Progress in Brain
Research 2008;167:151–169. [PubMed: 18037013]
Liberzon I, Taylor SF, Amdur R, Jung TD, Chamberlain KR, Minoshima S, et al. Brain activation in
PTSD in response to trauma-related stimuli. Biological Psychiatry 1999;45:817–826. [PubMed:
10202568]
Light, LL.; Prull, MW.; La Voie, DJ.; Healy, MR. Dual process theories of memory in old age. In:
Perfect, TJ.; Maylor, EA., editors. Models of cognitive aging. Oxford: Oxford University Press;
2000. p. 238-300.
Lindsay, DS. Source Monitoring. In: Byrne, J.; Roediger, HL., III, editors. Cognitive psychology of
memory. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol. 2. Oxford: Elsevier;
2008. p. 325-348.(Series Ed.) (Series Ed.)
Lindsay DS, Hagen L, Read JD, Wade KA, Garry M. True photographs and false memories.
Psychological Science 2004;15:149–154. [PubMed: 15016285]
Lindsay DS, Johnson MK. The eyewitness suggestibility effect and memory for source. Memory &
Cognition 1989;17:349–358.
Lindsay DS, Johnson MK, Kwon P. Developmental changes in memory source monitoring. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology 1991;52:297–318. [PubMed: 1770330]
Lindsay DS, Read JD. Psychotherapy and memories of childhood sexual abuse: A cognitive
perspective. Applied Cognitive Psychology 1994;8:281–338.
Lipton PA, Eichenbaum H. Complementary roles of hippocampus and medial entorhinal cortex in
episodic memory. Neural Plasticity 2008;Vol. 2008:1–8.
Loftus, EF. Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1979.
Loftus EF, Pickrell JE. The formation of false memories. Psychiatric Annals 1995;25:720–725.
Lyle KB, Bloise SM, Johnson MK. Age-related binding deficits and the content of false memories.
Psychology and Aging 2006;21:86–95. [PubMed: 16594794]
Lyle KB, Johnson MK. Importing perceived features into false memories. Memory 2006;14:197–213.
[PubMed: 16484110]
Lyle KB, Johnson MK. Source misattributions may increase the accuracy of source judgments.
Memory & Cognition 2007;35:1024–1033.
MacPherson SE, Phillips LH, Della Sala S. Age, executive function, and social decision making: A
dorsolateral prefrontal theory of cognitive aging. Psychology & Aging 2002;17:598–609.
[PubMed: 12507357]
Macrae CN, Moran JM, Heatherton TF, Banfield JF, Kelley WM. Medial prefrontal activity predicts
memory for self. Cerebral Cortex 2004;14:647–654. [PubMed: 15084488]
Maratos EJ, Dolan RJ, Morris JS, Henson RNA, Rugg MD. Neural activity associated with episodic
memory for emotional context. Neuropsychologia 2001;39:910–920. [PubMed: 11516444]
Marcel AJ. Conscious and unconscious perception: Experiments on visual masking and word
recognition. Cognitive Psychology 1983;15:197–237. [PubMed: 6617135]
Maril A, Simons JS, Weaver JJ, Schacter DL. Graded recall success: an event-related fMRI
comparison of tip of the tongue and feeling of knowing. NeuroImage 2005;24:1130–1138.
[PubMed: 15670690]
Marsh, EJ.; Eslick, AN.; Fazio, LK. False memories. In: Byrne, J.; Roediger, HL., III, editors.
Cognitive psychology of memory. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol.
2. Oxford: Elsevier; 2008. p. 221-238.
Marsh RL, Hicks JL. Test formats change source-monitoring decision processes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1998;24:1137–1151.
Mather, M. Aging and emotional memory. In: Reisberg, D.; Hertel, P., editors. Memory and emotion.
New York: Oxford University Press; 2004. p. 272-307.
Mather, M. Why memories may become more positive with age. In: Uttl, B.; Ohta, N.; Siegenthaler,
AL., editors. Memory and emotion: Interdisciplinary perspectives. Boston: Blackwell Publishing;
2006. p. 135-159.
Page 54

Mather M. Emotional arousal and memory binding: An object-based framework. Perspectives on
Psychological Science 2007;2:33–52.
Mather M, Henkel LA, Johnson MK. Evaluating characteristics of false memories: Remember/know
judgments and memory characteristics questionnaire compared. Memory & Cognition
1997;25:826–837.
Mather M, Johnson MK, De Leonardis DM. Stereotype reliance in source monitoring: Age differences
and neuropsychological test correlates. Cognitive Neuropsychology 1999;16:437–458.
Mather M, Mitchell KJ, Raye CL, Novak DL, Greene EJ, Johnson MK. Emotional arousal can impair
feature binding in working memory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2006;18:614–625.
[PubMed: 16768364]
May CP, Rahhal T, Berry EM, Leighton EA. Aging, source memory, and emotion. Psychology and
Aging 2005;20:571–578. [PubMed: 16420132]
Mayes A, Montaldi D, Migo E. Associative memory and the medial temporal lobes. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 2007;11:126–135. [PubMed: 17270487]
McCandliss BD, Cohen L, Dehaene S. The visual word form area: expertise for reading in the fusiform
gyrus. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2003;7:293–299. [PubMed: 12860187]
McDermott KB, Buckner RL, Petersen SE, Kelley WM, Sanders AL. Set- and code-specific activation
in the frontal cortex: an fMRI study of encoding and retrieval of faces and words. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 1999;11:631–640. [PubMed: 10601744]
McDuff, S.; Frankel, HC.; Norman, KA. Many roads to the source: Tracking differences in memory
retrieval strategies using multi-voxel pattern analysis. Princeton University; 2008. Manuscript
under review
McElree B, Dolan PO, Jacoby LL. Isolating the contributions of familiarity and source information to
item recognition: A time course analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 1999;25:563–582.
McGinnis D, Roberts P. Qualitative characteristics of vivid memories attributed to real and imagined
experiences. American Journal of Psychology 1996;109:59–77.
McGuire PK, Silbersweig DA, Wright I, Murray RM, David AS, Frackowiak RSJ, et al. Abnormal
monitoring of inner speech: a physiological basis for auditory hallucinations. Lancet
1995;346:596–600. [PubMed: 7651003]
McNally RJ. Cognitive abnormalities in post-traumatic stress disorder. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
2006;10:271–277. [PubMed: 16697695]
Meiser T, Broder A. Memory for multidimensional source information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2002;28:116–137.
Meiser T, Sattler C. Boundaries of the relation between conscious recollection and source memory for
perceptual details. Consciousness and Cognition 2007;16:189–210. [PubMed: 16725348]
Metcalf K, Langdon R, Coltheart M. Models of confabulation: A critical review and a new framework.
Cognitive Neuropsychology 2007;24:23–47. [PubMed: 18416482]
Meyer-Lindenberg AS, Olsen RK, Kohn PD, Brown T, Egan MF, Weinberger DR, et al. Regionally
specific disturbance of dorsolateral prefrontal-hippocampal functional connectivity in
schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 2005;62:379–386. [PubMed: 15809405]
Mickley KR, Kensinger EA. Emotional valence influences the neural correlates associated with
remembering and knowing. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2008;8:143–152.
Mikels JA, Larkin GR, Reuter-Lorenz PA, Carstensen LL. Divergent trajectories in the aging mind:
Changes in working memory for affective versus visual information with age. Psychology and
Aging 2005;20:542–553. [PubMed: 16420130]
Mitchell, KJ.; Johnson, MK. Source monitoring: Attributing mental experiences. In: Tulving, E.;
Craik, FIM., editors. The Oxford handbook of memory. New York: Oxford University Press;
2000. p. 179-195.
Mitchell, KJ.; Johnson, MR.; Higgins, JA.; Johnson, MK. Effects of age on modulation of posterior
category-specific activity during reflective attention. Yale University; 2009. Manuscript in
preparation
Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Mather M. Source monitoring and suggestibility to misinformation: Adult
age-related differences. Applied Cognitive Psychology 2003;17:107–119.
Page 55

Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Raye CL, D'Esposito M. fMRI evidence of age-related hippocampal
dysfunction in feature binding in working memory. Cognitive Brain Research 2000;10:197–206.
[PubMed: 10978709]
Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Raye CL, Greene EJ. Prefrontal cortex activity associated with source
monitoring in a working memory task. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2004;16:921–934.
[PubMed: 15298780]
Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Raye CL, Mather M, D'Esposito M. Aging and reflective processes of
working memory: Binding and test load deficits. Psychology and Aging 2000;15:527–541.
[PubMed: 11014715]
Mitchell KJ, Mather M, Johnson MK, Raye CL, Greene EJ. A functional magnetic resonance imaging
investigation of short-term source and item memory for negative pictures. NeuroReport
2006;17:1543–1547. [PubMed: 16957605]
Mitchell, KJ.; Nolen-Hoeksema, S.; Johnson, MK. The effects of dysphoria on brain activity
associated with source memory for emotional information. Yale University; 2009. Manuscript in
preparation
Mitchell KJ, Raye CL, Johnson MK, Greene EJ. An fMRI investigation of short-term source memory
in young and older adults. NeuroImage 2006;30:627–633. [PubMed: 16256377]
Mitchell KJ, Raye CL, McGuire JT, Frankel H, Greene EJ, Johnson MK. Neuroimaging evidence for
agenda-dependent monitoring of different features during short-term source memory tests.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2008;34:780–790.
Mitchell KJ, Zaragoza MS. Contextual overlap and eyewitness suggestibility. Memory & Cognition
2001;29:616–626.
Morcom AM, Li J, Rugg MD. Age effects on the neural correlates of episodic retrieval: Increased
cortical recruitment with matched performance. Cerebral Cortex 2007;17:2491–2506. [PubMed:
17204820]
Morris CD, Bransford JD, Franks JJ. Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate processing.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 1977;16:519–533.
Moscovitch M. Memory and working-with-memory: A component process model based on modules
and central systems. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 1992;4:257–267.
Moscovitch, M. Confabulation. In: Schacter, DL., editor. Memory distortion: How minds, brains, and
societies reconstruct the past. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1995. p. 226-251.
Moscovitch M, Winocur G. Frontal lobes, memory, and aging. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences 1995;769:119–150. [PubMed: 8595020]
Most SB, Chun MM, Widders DM, Zald DH. Attentional rubbernecking: Cognitive control and
personality in emotion-induced blindness. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 2005;12:654–661.
[PubMed: 16447378]
Multhaup KS, De Leonardis DM, Johnson MK. Source memory and eyewitness suggestibility in older
adults. Journal of General Psychology 1999;126:74–84. [PubMed: 10216970]
Myers CE, Shohamy D, Gluck MA, Grossman S, Kluger A, Ferris S, et al. Dissociating hippocampal
versus basal ganglia contributions to learning and transfer. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
2003;15:185–193. [PubMed: 12676056]
Nadel L, Hardt O. The spatial brain. Neuropsychology 1994;18:473–476. [PubMed: 15291725]
Naveh-Benjamin M. Adult age differences in memory performance: Tests of an associative deficit
hypothesis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2000;26:1170–1187.
Naveh-Benjamin M, Brav TK, Levy O. The associative memory deficit of older adults: The role of
strategy utilization. Psychology and Aging 2007;22:202–208. [PubMed: 17385995]
Naveh-Benjamin, M.; Old, SR. Aging and memory. In: Byrne, J.; Roediger, HL., III, editors.
Cognitive psychology of memory. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol.
2. Oxford: Elsevier; 2008. p. 787-808.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Neisser U. John Dean's memory: A case study. Cognition 1981;9:1–22. [PubMed: 7196816]
Newcombe, NS.; Lloyd, ME.; Ratliff, KR. Development of episodic and autobiographical memory: A
cognitive neuroscience perspective. In: Kail, RV., editor. Advances in child development and
behavior. Vol. Vol. 35. San Diego, CA: Elsevier; 2007. p. 37-85.
Page 56

Nolde SF, Johnson MK, D'Esposito M. Left prefrontal activation during episodic remembering: an
event-related fMRI study. NeuroReport 1998;9:3509–3514. [PubMed: 9855308]
Nolde SF, Johnson MK, Raye CL. The role of the prefrontal cortex during tests of episodic memory.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 1998;2:399–406.
Norman, KA.; Detre, G.; Polyn, SM. Computational models of episodic memory. In: Sun, R., editor.
The Cambridge handbook of computational cognitive modeling. New York: Cambridge
University Press; 2008. p. 189-225.
Norman KA, O’Reilly RC. Modeling hippocampal and neocortical contributions to recognition
memory: A complementary-learning-systems approach. Psychological Review 2003;110:611–
646. [PubMed: 14599236]
Norman KA, Schacter DL. False recognition in younger and older adults: Exploring the characteristics
of illusory memories. Memory & Cognition 1997;25:838–848.
Northoff G, Heinzel A, de Greck M, Bermpohl F, Dobrowolny H, Panksepp J. Self-referential
processing in our brain-A meta-analysis of imaging studies on the self. NeuroImage
2006;31:440–457. [PubMed: 16466680]
O'Brien JT, Desmond P, Ames D, Schweitzer I, Tress B. Magnetic resonance imaging correlates of
memory impairment in the healthy elderly: Association with medial temporal lobe atrophy but
not white matter lesions. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 1997;12:369–374.
[PubMed: 9152723]
Ochsner KN, Beer JS, Robertson ER, Cooper JC, Gabrieli JDE, Kihlstrom JF, et al. The neural
correlates of direct and reflected self-knowledge. NeuroImage 2005;28:797–814. [PubMed:
16290016]
Ochsner KN, Knierim K, Ludlow DH, Hanelin J, Ramachandran T, Glover G, et al. Reflecting upon
feelings: An fMRI study of neural systems supporting the attribution of emotion to self and other.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2004;16:1746–1772. [PubMed: 15701226]
O'Hanlon L, Wilcox KA, Kemper S. Age differences in implicit and explicit associative memory:
Exploring elaborative processing effects. Experimental Aging Research 2001;27:341–359.
[PubMed: 11681197]
Okado Y, Stark C. Neural processing associated with true and false memory retrieval. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 2003;3:323–334.
Old SR, Naveh-Benjamin M. Differential effects of age on item and associative measures of memory:
A meta-analysis. Psychology and Aging 2008;23:104–118. [PubMed: 18361660]
Olson IR, Berryhill M. Some surprising findings on the involvement of the parietal lobe in human
memory. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory. (in press).
Olson IR, Page K, Moore KS, Chatterjee A, Verfaellie M. Working memory for conjunctions relies on
the medial temporal lobe. The Journal of Neuroscience 2006;26:4596–4601. [PubMed:
16641239]
Olson IR, Plotzker A, Ezzyat Y. The enigmatic temporal pole: a review of findings on social and
emotional processing. Brain 2007;130:1718–1731. [PubMed: 17392317]
Õngur D, Cullen TJ, Wolf DH, Rohan M, Barreira P, Zalesak M, et al. The neural basis of relational
memory deficits in schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 2006;63:356–365. [PubMed:
16585464]
Onitsuka T, Shenton ME, Salisbury DF, Dickey CC, Kasai K, Toner SK, et al. Middle and inferior
temporal gyrus gray matter volume abnormalities in chronic schizophrenia: An MRI study.
American Journal of Psychiatry 2004;161:1603–1611. [PubMed: 15337650]
Otten LJ. Fragments of a larger whole: Retrieval cues constrain observed neural correlates of memory
encoding. Cerebral Cortex 2007;17:2030–2038. [PubMed: 17088375]
Paller KA. Electrical signals of memory and of the awareness of remembering. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 2004;13:49–55.
Paller KA, Voss JL, Boehm SG. Validating neural correlates of familiarity. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 2007;11:243–250. [PubMed: 17475539]
Park DC, Polk TA, Park R, Minear M, Savage A, Smith MR. Aging reduces neural specialization in
ventral visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2004;101:13091–13095.
Page 57

Parkin A. The neuropsychology of false memory. Learning and Individual Differences 1997;9:341–
357.
Parkin AJ, Walter BM. Recollective experience, normal aging, and frontal dysfunction. Psychology
and Aging 1992;7:290–298. [PubMed: 1610518]
Parks CM, Yonelinas AP. Moving beyond pure signal-detection models: Comment on Wixted (2007).
Psychological Review 2007;114:188–202. [PubMed: 17227187]
Payer D, Marshuetz C, Sutton B, Hebrank A, Welsh RC, Park DC. Decreased neural specialization in
old adults on a working memory task. NeuroReport 2006;17:487–491. [PubMed: 16543812]
Persson, J.; Nyberg, L. Altered brain activity in healthy seniors: what does it mean?. In: Møller, A.,
editor. Reprogramming the human brain. Progress in Brain Research. Vol. Vol. 157. The
Netherlands: Elsevier; 2006. p. 45-56.
Peters J, Koch B, Schwarz M, Daum I. Domain-specific impairment of source memory following a
right posterior medial temporal lobe lesion. Hippocampus 2007;17:505–509. [PubMed:
17476681]
Peters J, Suchan B, Köster O, Daum I. Domain-specific retrieval of source information in the medial
temporal lobe. European Journal of Neuroscience 2007;26:1333–1343. [PubMed: 17767510]
Petrides M. The mid-ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and active mnemonic retrieval. Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory 2002;78:528–538. [PubMed: 12559832]
Phan KL, Wager T, Taylor SF, Liberzon I. Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: A meta-analysis of
emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI. NeuroImage 2002;16:331–348. [PubMed:
12030820]
Phelps EA. Emotion and cognition: Insights from studies of the human amygdala. Annual Review of
Psychology 2006;57:27–53.
Phelps EA, Ling S, Carrasco M. Emotion facilitates perception and potentiates the perceptual benefits
of attention. Psychological Science 2006;17:292–299. [PubMed: 16623685]
Phelps EA, Sharot T. How (and why) emotion enhances the subjective sense of recollection. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 2008;17:147–152.
Prabhakaran V, Narayanan K, Zhao Z, Gabrieli JDE. Integration of diverse information in working
memory within the frontal lobe. Nature Neuroscience 2000;3:85–90.
Preston AR, Gabrieli JDE. Dissociation between explicit memory and configural memory in the
human medial temporal lobe. Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:2192–2207. [PubMed: 18234685]
Protzner AB, McIntosh AR. Modulation of ventral prefrontal cortex functional connections reflects the
interplay of cognitive processes and stimulus characteristics. Cerebral Cortex. 2008
Prull MW, Dawes LLC, Martin AM III, Rosenberg HF, Light LL. Recollection and familiarity in
recognition memory: Adult age differences and neuropsychological test correlates. Psychology
and Aging 2006;21:107–118. [PubMed: 16594796]
Puce A, Allison T, Gore JC, McCarthy G. Face-sensitive regions in human extrastriate cortex studied
by functional MRI. Journal of Neurophysiology 1995;74:1192–1199. [PubMed: 7500143]
Qin J, Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Krystal JH, Southwick SM, Rasmusson AM, et al. Reactions to and
memories for the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in adults with posttraumatic stress
disorder. Applied Cognitive Psychology 2003;17:1081–1097.
Qin J, Raye CL, Johnson MK, Mitchell KJ. Source ROCs are (typically) curvilinear: Comment on
Yonelinas (1999). Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
2001;27:1110–1115.
Quamme JR, Yonelinas AP, Norman KA. Effect of unitization on associative recognition in amnesia.
Hippocampus 2007;17:192–200. [PubMed: 17203466]
Ragland JD, Valdez JN, Loughead J, Gur RC, Gur RE. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of
internal source monitoring in schizophrenia: Recognition with and without recollection.
Schizophrenia Research 2006;87:160–171. [PubMed: 16814525]
Rahhal TA, May CP, Hasher L. Truth and character: Sources that older adults can remember.
Psychological Science 2002;13:101–105. [PubMed: 11933991]
Page 58

Rajah MN, D’Esposito M. Region-specific changes in prefrontal function with age: a review of PET
and fMRI studies on working and episodic memory. Brain 2005;128:1964–1983. [PubMed:
16049041]
Rajarethinam R, Sahni S, Rosenberg DR, Keshavan MS. Reduced superior temporal gyrus volume in
young offspring of patients with schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry 2004;161:1121–
1124. [PubMed: 15169705]
Ranganath C, Blumenfeld RS. Doubts about double dissociations between short-and long-term
memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2005;9:374–380. [PubMed: 16002324]
Ranganath, C.; Blumenfeld, RS. Prefrontal cortex and memory. In: Byrne, J.; Eichenbaum, H., editors.
Memory systems. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol. 3. Oxford:
Elsevier; 2008. p. 261-280.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Ranganath C, Johnson MK, D'Esposito M. Left anterior prefrontal activation increases with demands
to recall specific perceptual information. The Journal of Neuroscience 2000;20:RC108:1–5.
[PubMed: 10627575]
Ranganath C, Minzenberg MJ, Ragland JD. The cognitive neuroscience of memory function and
dysfunction in schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry 2008;64:18–25. [PubMed: 18495087]
Rauch SL, Whalen PJ, Shin LM, McInerney SC, Macklin ML, Lasko NB, et al. Exaggerated amygdala
response to masked facial stimuli in posttraumatic stress disorder: A functional MRI study.
Biological Psychiatry 2000;47:769–776. [PubMed: 10812035]
Raye CL, Johnson MK, Mitchell KJ, Greene EJ, Johnson MR. Refreshing: A minimal executive
function. Cortex 2007;43:135–145. [PubMed: 17334213]
Raye C, Johnson MK, Mitchell KJ, Nolde SF, D’Esposito M. fMRI investigations of left and right
PFC contributions to episodic remembering. Psychobiology 2000;28:197–206.
Raye CL, Johnson MK, Mitchell KJ, Reeder JA, Greene EJ. Neuroimaging a single thought:
Dorsolateral PFC activity associated with refreshing just-activated information. NeuroImage
2002;15:447–453. [PubMed: 11798278]
Raz, N. Aging of the brain and its impact on cognitive performance: Integration of structural and
functional findings. In: Craik, FIM.; Salthouse, TA., editors. Handbook of aging and cognition:
Second edition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 2000. p. 1-90.
Raz N, Lindenberger U, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Head D, Williamson A, et al. Regional brain
changes in aging healthy adults: General trends, individual differences and modifiers. Cerebral
Cortex 2005;15:1676–1689. [PubMed: 15703252]
Raz N, Rodrigue KM. Differential aging of the brain: Patterns, cognitive correlates and modifiers.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 2006;30:730–748. [PubMed: 16919333]
Raz N, Rodrigue KM, Head D, Kennedy KM, Acker JD. Differential aging of the medial temporal
lobe: A study of a five-year change. Neurology 2004;62:433–438. [PubMed: 14872026]
Reinitz MT, Verfaellie M, Milberg WP. Memory conjunction errors in normal and amnesic subjects.
Journal of Memory and Language 1996;35:286–299.
Reisberg, D.; Heuer, F. Memory for emotional events. In: Reisberg, D.; Hertel, P., editors. Memory
and emotion. New York: Oxford University Press; 2004. p. 3-41.
Reuter-Lorenz PA. New visions of the aging mind and brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
2002;6:394–400. [PubMed: 12200182]
Riccio DC, Ackil J, Burch-Vernon A. Forgetting of stimulus attributes: Methodological implications
for assessing associative phenomena. Psychological Bulletin 1992;112:433–445. [PubMed:
1438637]
Richardson MP, Strange BA, Dolan RJ. Encoding of emotional memories depends on amygdala and
hippocampus and their interactions. Nature Neuroscience 2004;7:278–285.
Ritchey M, Dolcos F, Cabeza R. Role of amygdala connectivity in the persistence of emotional
memories over time: An event-related fMRI investigation. Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:2494–2504.
[PubMed: 18375529]
Rizzo L, Danion J-M, Van der Linden M, Grange ́ D, Rohmer J-G. Impairment of memory for spatial
context in schizophrenia. Neuropsychology 1996;10:376–384.
Roediger HL III, Geraci L. Aging and the misinformation effect: A neuropsychological analysis.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2007;33:321–334.
Page 59

Roediger HL III, McDermott KB. Creating false memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1995;21:803–814.
Ross, M. Validating memories. In: Stein, NL.; Ornstein, PA.; Tversky, B.; Brainerd, C., editors.
Memory for everyday and emotional events. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum; 1997. p. 49-81.
Rossi S, Pasqualetti P, Zito G, Vecchio F, Cappa SF, Miniussi C, et al. Prefrontal and parietal cortex in
human episodic memory: an interference study by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.
European Journal of Neuroscience 2006;23:793–800. [PubMed: 16487159]
Rotello CM, Macmillan NA, Reeder JA. Sum-difference theory of remembering and knowing: A two-
dimensional signal-detection model. Psychological Review 2004;111:588–616. [PubMed:
15250777]
Rubin DC, Feldman ME, Beckham JC. Reliving, emotions, and fragmentation in the autobiographical
memories of veterans diagnosed with PTSD. Applied Cognitive Psychology 2004;18:17–35.
Rubin DC, Schulkind MD. Distribution of important and word-cue autobiographical memories in 20-,
35-, and 70-year-old adults. Psychology and Aging 1997;12:524–535. [PubMed: 9308099]
Rugg MD, Curran T. Event-related potentials and recognition memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
2007;11:251–257. [PubMed: 17481940]
Rugg MD, Fletcher PC, Chua PM-L, Dolan RJ. The role of the prefrontal cortex in recognition
memory and memory for source: An fMRI study. NeuroImage 1999;10:520–529. [PubMed:
10547329]
Rugg MD, Otten LJ, Henson RNA. The neural basis of episodic memory: evidence from functional
neuroimaging. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 2002;357:1097–1110.
Rugg MD, Wilding EL. Retrieval processing and episodic memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
2000;4:108–115. [PubMed: 10689345]
Ryan L, Nadel L, Keil K, Putnam K, Schnyer D, Trouard T, et al. Hippocampal complex and retrieval
of recent and very remote autobiographical memories: Evidence from functional magnetic
resonance imaging in neurologically intact people. Hippocampus 2001;11:707–714. [PubMed:
11811665]
Rybash JM, Hrubi-Bopp KL. Source monitoring and false recollection: A life span developmental
perspective. Experimental Aging Research 2000;26:75–87. [PubMed: 10689557]
Schacter DL, Addis DR, Buckner RL. Remembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective
brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2007;8:657–661.
Schacter DL, Harbluk JL, McLachlan DR. Retrieval without recollection: An experimental analysis of
source amnesia. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 1984;23:593–611.
Schacter DL, Israel L, Racine C. Suppressing false recognition in younger and older adults: The
distinctiveness heuristic. Journal of Memory and Language 1999;40:1–24.
Schacter DL, Koutstaal W, Norman KA. False memories and aging. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
1997;1:229–236.
Schacter DL, Osowiecki D, Kaszniak AW, Kihlstrom JF, Valdiserri M. Source memory: Extending the
boundaries of age-related deficits. Psychology and Aging 1994;9:81–89. [PubMed: 8185872]
Schacter DL, Reiman E, Curran T, Yun LS, Bandy D, McDermott KB, et al. Neuroanatomical
correlates of veridical and illusory recognition memory: Evidence from positron emission
tomography. Neuron 1996;17:267–274. [PubMed: 8780650]
Schacter DL, Wagner AD. Perspectives: neuroscience. Remembrance of things past. Science
1999;285:1503–1504. [PubMed: 10498535]
Schnider, A. The confabulating mind: How the brain creates reality. New York: Oxford University
Press; 2008.
Shallice T, Fletcher P, Frith CD, Grasby P, Frackowiak RSJ, Dolan RJ. Brain regions associated with
acquisition and retrieval of verbal episodic memory. Nature 1994;368:633–635. [PubMed:
8145849]
Sharot T, Delgado MR, Phelps EA. How emotion enhances the feeling of remembering. Nature
Neuroscience 2004;7:1376–1380.
Sharot T, Yonelinas AP. Differential time-dependent effects of emotion on recollective experience and
memory for contextual informationq. Cognition 2008;106:538–547. [PubMed: 17451666]
Page 60

Shenton ME, Dickey CC, Frumin M, McCarley RW. A review of MRI findings in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research 2001;49:1–52. [PubMed: 11343862]
Shergill SS, Brammer MJ, Fukuda H, Williams SCR, Murray RM, McGuire PK. Engagement of brain
areas implicated in processing inner speech in people with auditory hallucinations. British
Journal of Psychiatry 2003;182:525–531. [PubMed: 12777344]
Shimamura, AP. Memory and the prefrontal cortex Structure and function of the human prefrontal
cortex. In: Grafman, J.; Holyoak, KJ.; Boller, F., editors. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences. Vol. Vol. 769. 1995. p. 151-159.
Shimamura, AP. Relational binding theory and the role of consolidation in memory retrieval. In:
Squire, LR.; Schacter, DL., editors. Neuropsychology of memory, 3rd Ed. New York: The
Guilford Press; 2002. p. 61-72.
Shimamura AP, Squire LR. A neuropsychological study of fact memory and source amnesia. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1987;13:464–473.
Shin LM, Rauch SL, Pitman RK. Amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex, and hippocampal function in
PTSD. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 2006;1071:67–79. [PubMed: 16891563]
Shohamy D, Wagner AD. Integrating memories in the human brain: Hippocampal-midbrain encoding
of overlapping events. Neuron 2008;60:378–389. [PubMed: 18957228]
Siegle GJ, Steinhauer SR, Thase ME, Stenger VA, Carter CS. Can’t shake that feeling: Event-related
fMRI assessment of sustained amygdala activity in response to emotional information in
depressed individuals. Biological Psychiatry 2002;51:693–707. [PubMed: 11983183]
Siegle GJ, Thompson W, Carter CS, Steinhauer SR, Thase ME. Increased amygdala and decreased
dorsolateral prefrontal BOLD responses in unipolar depression: Related and independent
features. Biological Psychiatry 2007;61:198–209. [PubMed: 17027931]
Simons, JS. Constraints on cognitive theories from neuroimaging studies of source memory. In:
Rösler, F.; Ranganath, C.; Röder, B.; Kluwe, RH., editors. Neuroimaging and Psychological
Theories of Human Memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press; (in press).
Simons JS, Davis SW, Gilbert SJ, Frith CD, Burgess PW. Discriminating imagined from perceived
information engages brain areas implicated in schizophrenia. NeuroImage 2006;32:696–703.
[PubMed: 16797186]
Simons JS, Dodson CS, Bell D, Schacter DL. Specific-and partial-source memory: Effects of aging.
Psychology and Aging 2004;19:689–694. [PubMed: 15584793]
Simons JS, Gilbert SJ, Owen AM, Fletcher PC, Burgess PW. Distinct roles for lateral and medial
anterior prefrontal cortex in contextual recollection. Journal of Neurophysiology 2005;94:813–
820. [PubMed: 15728761]
Simons JS, Henson RNA, Gilbert SJ, Fletcher PC. Separable forms of reality monitoring supported by
the anterior prefrontal cortex. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2008;20:447–457. [PubMed:
18004946]
Simons JS, Koutstaal W, Prince S, Wagner AD, Schacter DL. Neural mechanisms of visual object
priming: evidence for perceptual and semantic distinctions in fusiform cortex. NeuroImage
2003;19:613–626. [PubMed: 12880792]
Simons JS, Owen AM, Fletcher PC, Burgess PW. Anterior prefrontal cortex and the recollection of
contextual information. Neuropsychologia 2005;43:1774–1783. [PubMed: 16154453]
Simons JS, Peers PV, Hwang DY, Ally BA, Fletcher PC, Budson AE. Is the parietal lobe necessary for
recollection in humans? Neuropsychologia 2008;46:1185–1191. [PubMed: 17850832]
Simons J, Peers P, Mazuz Y, Berryhill M, Olson I. Dissociation between memory accuracy and
memory confidence following bilateral parietal lesions. 2009 Manuscript under review.
Simons JS, Verfaellie M, Galton CJ, Miller BL, Hodges JR, Graham KS. Recollection-based memory
in frontotemporal dementia: implications for theories of long-term memory. Brain
2002;125:2523–2536. [PubMed: 12390977]
Skinner EI, Fernandes MA. Neural correlates of recollection and familiarity: A review of
neuroimaging and patient data. Neuropsychologia 2007;45:2163–2179. [PubMed: 17445844]
Slotnick SD, Klein SA, Dodson CS, Shimamura AP. An analysis of signal detection and threshold
models of source memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition 2000;26:1499–1517.
Page 61

Slotnick SD, Moo LR, Segal JB, Hart J. Distinct prefrontal cortex activity associated with item
memory and source memory for visual shapes. Cognitive Brain Research 2003;17:75–82.
[PubMed: 12763194]
Slotnick SD, Schacter DL. A sensory signature that distinguishes true from false memories. Nature
Neuroscience 2004;7:664–672.
Small GW, Bookheimer SY, Thompson PM, Cole GM, Huang S-C, Kepe V, et al. Current and future
uses of neuroimaging for cognitively impaired patients. Lancet Neurology 2008;7:161–172.
[PubMed: 18207114]
Small SA, Tsai WY, DeLaPaz R, Mayeux R, Stern Y. Imaging hippocampal function across the
human life span: Is memory decline normal or not? Annals of Neurology 2002;51:290–295.
[PubMed: 11891823]
Smith APR, Henson RNA, Dolan RJ, Rugg MD. fMRI correlates of the episodic retrieval of emotional
contexts. NeuroImage 2004;22:868–878. [PubMed: 15193617]
Smith APR, Henson RNA, Rugg MD, Dolan RJ. Modulation of retrieval processing reflects accuracy
of emotional source memory. Learning & Memory 2005;12:472–479. [PubMed: 16204201]
Sommer IEC, Diederen KMJ, Blom J-D, Willems A, Kushan L, Slotema K, et al. Auditory verbal
hallucinations predominantly activate the right inferior frontal area. Brain 2008;131:3169–3177.
[PubMed: 18854323]
Spencer WD, Raz N. Differential effects of aging on memory for content and context: A meta-
analysis. Psychology and Aging 1995;10:527–539. [PubMed: 8749580]
Sperling RA, Bates JF, Chua EF, Cocchiarella AJ, Rentz DM, Rosen BR, et al. fMRI studies of
associative encoding in young and elderly controls and mild Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of
Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 2003;74:44–50.
Squire LR. Memory systems of the brain: A brief history and current perspective. Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory 2004;82:171–177. [PubMed: 15464402]
Squire, LR.; Knowlton, BJ. Memory, hippocampus, and brain systems. In: Gazzaniga, MS., editor. The
cognitive neurosciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 1995. p. 825-837.
Squire LR, Knowlton B, Musen G. The structure and organization of memory. Annual Review of
Psychology 1993;44:453–495.
Squire, LR.; Shrager, Y. Declarative memory system: amnesia. In: Byrne, J.; Eichenbaum, H., editors.
Memory systems. Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference. Vol. Vol. 3. Oxford:
Elsevier; 2008. p. 67-78.(Series Ed.) (Vol. Ed.)
Squire LR, Stark CEL, Clark RE. The medial temporal lobe. Annual Review of Neuroscience
2004;27:279–306.
Squire LR, Wixted JT, Clark RE. Recognition memory and the medial temporal lobe: a new
perspective. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2007;8:872–883.
Squire LR, Zola-Morgan S. The medial temporal lobe memory system. Science 1991;253:1380–1386.
[PubMed: 1896849]
Staresina BP, Davachi L. Differential encoding mechanisms for subsequent associative recognition
and free recall. The Journal of Neuroscience 2006;26:9162–9172. [PubMed: 16957073]
Stark CEL, Bayley PJ, Squire LR. Recognition memory for single items and for associations is
similarly impaired following damage to the hippocampal region. Learning & Memory
2002;9:238–242. [PubMed: 12359833]
Stark CEL, Squire LR. Hippocampal damage equally impairs memory for single items and memory for
conjunctions. Hippocampus 2003;13:281–292. [PubMed: 12699335]
Starns JJ, Hicks JL. Source dimensions are retrieved independently in multidimensional monitoring
tasks. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2005;31:1213–
1220.
Starns JJ, Hicks JL, Brown NL, Martin BA. Source memory for unrecognized items: Predictions from
multivariate signal detection theory. Memory & Cognition 2008;36:1–8.
Steffens MC, Buchner A, Martensen H, Erdfelder E. Further evidence on the similarity of memory
processes in the process dissociation procedure and in source monitoring. Memory & Cognition
2000;28:1152–1164.
Page 62

Stuss, DT.; Benson, DF. The frontal lobes. New York: Raven Press; 1986.
Summerfield C, Greene M, Wager T, Egner T, Hirsch J, Mangels J. Neocortical connectivity during
episodic memory formation. PLoS Biology 2006;4:855–864.
Suzuki M, Fujii T, Tsukiura T, Okuda J, Umetsu A, Nagasaka T, et al. Neural basis of temporal
context memory: A functional MRI study. NeuroImage 2002;17:1790–1796. [PubMed:
12498752]
Swick D, Senkfor AJ, Van Petten C. Source memory retrieval is affected by aging and prefrontal
lesions: Behavioral and ERP evidence. Brain Research 2006;1107:161–176. [PubMed:
16828722]
Tapia G, Clarys D, El Hage W, Belzung C, Isingrini M. PTSD psychiatric patients exhibit a deficit in
remembering. Memory 2007;15:145–153. [PubMed: 17534108]
Thoma P, Zoppelt D, Wiebel B, Daum I. Recollection and familiarity in negative schizophrenia.
Neuropsychologia 2006;44:430–435. [PubMed: 15993449]
Thompson-Schill SL, D'Esposito M, Aguirre GK, Farah MJ. Role of left inferior prefrontal cortex in
retrieval of semantic knowledge: A reevaluation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA 1997;94:14792–14797.
Tulving E, Kapur S, Craik FIM, Moscovitch M, Houle S. Hemispheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry
in episodic memory: Positron emission tomography findings. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1994;91:2016–2020. [PubMed: 8134342]
Tulving E, Thomson DM. Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review 1973;80:352–373.
Turner MS, Simons JS, Gilbert SJ, Frith CD, Burgess PW. Distinct roles for lateral and medial rostral
prefrontal cortex in source monitoring of perceived and imagined events. Neuropsychologia
2008;46:1442–1453. [PubMed: 18294660]
Uncapher MR, Otten LJ, Rugg MD. Episodic encoding is more than the sum of its parts: An fMRI
investigation of multifeatural contextual encoding. Neuron 2006;52:547–556. [PubMed:
17088219]
Uncapher MR, Rugg MD. Fractionation of the component processes underlying successful episodic
encoding: A combined functional magnetic resonance imaging and divided-attention study.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 2008;20:240–254. [PubMed: 18275332]
Valenzuela MJ, Breakspear M, Sachdev P. Complex mental activity and the aging brain: Molecular,
cellular and cortical network mechanisms. Brain Research Reviews 2007;56:198–213. [PubMed:
17870176]
Van Petten C. Relationship between hippocampal volume and memory ability in healthy individuals
across the lifespan: review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia 2004;42:1394–1413. [PubMed:
15193947]
Van Petten C, Luka BJ, Rubin SR, Ryan JP. Frontal brain activity predicts individual performance in
an associative memory exclusion test. Cerebral Cortex 2002;12:1180–1192. [PubMed:
12379606]
Velanova K, Lustig C, Jacoby LL, Buckner RL. Evidence for frontally mediated controlled processing
differences in older adults. Cerebral Cortex 2007;17:1033–1046. [PubMed: 16774962]
Viard A, Piolino P, Desgranges B, Chetelat G, Lebreton K, Landeau B, et al. Hippocampal activation
for autobiographical memories over the entire lifetime in healthy aged subjects: An fMRI study.
Cerebral Cortex 2007;17:2453–2467. [PubMed: 17204823]
Vilberg KL, Rugg MD. Dissociation of the neural correlates of recognition memory according to
familiarity, recollection, and amount of recollected information. Neuropsychologia
2007;45:2216–2225. [PubMed: 17449068]
Vilberg KL, Rugg MD. Memory retrieval and the parietal cortex: A review of evidence from a dual-
process perspective. Neuropsychologia 2008;46:1787–1799. [PubMed: 18343462]
Vilberg KL, Rugg MD. An investigation of the effects of relative probability of old and new test items
on neural correlates of successful and unsuccessful source memory. Neuroimage. (in press).
Vinogradov S, Luks TL, Schulman BJ, Simpson GV. Deficit in a neural correlate of reality monitoring
in schizophrenia patients. Cerebral Cortex 2008;18:2532–2539. [PubMed: 18321870]
Page 63

Vinogradov S, Luks TL, Simpson GV, Schulman BJ, Glenn S, Wong AE. Brain activation patterns
during memory of cognitive agency. NeuroImage 2006;31:896–905. [PubMed: 16516497]
Vogt, BA.; Laureys, S. Posterior cingulate, precuneal and retrosplenial cortices: cytology and
components of the neural network correlates of consciousness. In: Layreys, S., editor. Progress in
brain research. Vol. Vol. 150. The Netherlands: Elsevier; 2005. p. 205-217.
Wagner AD. Working memory contributions to human learning and remembering. Neuron
1999;22:19–22. [PubMed: 10027285]
Wagner AD, Poldrack RA, Eldridge LL, Desmond JE, Glover GH, Gabrieli JDE. Material-specific
lateralization of prefrontal activation during episodic encoding and retrieval. Neuroreport
1998;9:3711–3717. [PubMed: 9858384]
Wagner AD, Schacter DL, Rotte M, Koutstaal W, Maril A, Dale AM, et al. Building memories:
Remembering and forgetting of verbal experiences as predicted by brain activity. Science
1998;281:1188–1191. [PubMed: 9712582]
Wagner AD, Shannon BJ, Kahn I, Buckner RL. Parietal lobe contributions to episodic memory
retrieval. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2005;9:445–453. [PubMed: 16054861]
Wais PE. fMRI signals associated with memory strength in the medial temporal lobes: A meta-
analysis. Neuropsychologia 2008;46:3185–3196. [PubMed: 18817791]
Wais PE, Mickes L, Wixted JT. Remember/know judgments probe degrees of recollection. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 2008;20:400–405. [PubMed: 18004949]
Wais PE, Squire LR, Wixted JT. In search of recollection and familiarity signals in the hippocampus.
2008 Manuscript under review.
Waters FAV, Maybery MT, Badcock JC, Michie PT. Context memory and binding in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research 2004;68:119–125. [PubMed: 15099596]
Weiss AP, Heckers S. Neuroimaging of declarative memory in schizophrenia. Scandinavian Journal of
Psychology 2001;42:239–250. [PubMed: 11501738]
Werner NS, Meindl T, Engel RR, Rosner R, Riedel M, Reiser M, et al. Hippocampal function during
associative learning in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric
Research 2009;43:309–318. [PubMed: 18490028]
West RL. An application of prefrontal cortex function theory to cognitive aging. Psychological
Bulletin 1996;120:272–292. [PubMed: 8831298]
Whalley MG, Rugg MD, Smith APR, Dolan RJ, Brewin CR. Incidental retrieval of emotional contexts
in post-traumatic stress disorder and depression: An fMRI study. Brain and Cognition. 2008
Wheeler ME, Buckner RL. Functional-anatomic correlates of remembering and knowing. NeuroImage
2004;21:1337–1349. [PubMed: 15050559]
Williams JMG, Barnhofer T, Crane C, Hermans D, Raes F, Watkins E, et al. Autobiographical
memory specificity and emotional disorder. Psychological Bulletin 2007;133:122–148. [PubMed:
17201573]
Wixted JT. Dual-process theory and signal-detection theory of recognition memory. Psychological
Review 2007;114:152–176. [PubMed: 17227185]
Woodruff CC, Johnson JD, Uncapher MR, Rugg MD. Content-specificity of the neural correlates of
recollection. Neuropsychologia 2005;43:1022–1032. [PubMed: 15769488]
Woodruff PWR, Wright IC, Bullmore ET, Brammer M, Howard RJ, Williams SCR, et al. Auditory
hallucinations and the temporal cortical response to speech in schizophrenia: A functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. American Journal of Psychiatry 1997;154:1676–1682.
[PubMed: 9396945]
Woodward TS, Weinstein S, Cairo TA, Metzak P, Ngan ETC, Kumar D. Hallucinations are associated
with aberrant activation in inner speech regions during source monitoring [Abstract].
Schizophrenia Research 2008;102/1–3:96.
Yonelinas AP. Receiver-operating characteristics in recognition memory: Evidence for a dual-process
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1994;20:1341–
1354.
Yonelinas AP. The contribution of recollection and familiarity to recognition and source-memory
judgments: A formal dual-process model and an analysis of receiver operating characteristics.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1999;25:1415–1434.
Page 64

Yonelinas AP. The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30 years of research. Journal of
Memory and Language 2002;46:441–517.
Yonelinas AP, Kroll NEA, Quamme JR, Lazzara MM, Sauve M-J, Widaman KF, et al. Effects of
extensive temporal lobe damage or mild hypoxia on recollection and familiarity. Nature
Neuroscience 2002;5:1236–1241.
Yonelinas AP, Parks CM. Receiver operating characteristics (ROCs) in recognition memory: A
review. Psychological Bulletin 2007;133:800–832. [PubMed: 17723031]
Yonelinas AP, Widaman K, Mungas D, Reed B, Weiner MW, Chui HC. Memory in the aging brain:
Doubly dissociating the contribution of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. Hippocampus
2007;17:1134–1140. [PubMed: 17636547]
Yu J, Bellezza FS. Process dissociation as source monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition 2000;26:1518–1533.
Zacks, RT.; Hasher, L. Aging and long-term memory: Deficits are not inevitable. In: Bialystok, E.;
Craik, FIM., editors. Lifespan cognition: Mechanisms of change. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press; 2006. p. 162-177.
Zaragoza MS, Koshmider JW III. Misled subjects may know more than their performance implies.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 1989;15:246–255.
Zaragoza MS, Lane SM. Processing resources and eyewitness suggestibility. Journal of Legal and
Criminological Psychology 1998;3:305–320.
Zubieta J-K, Chinitz JA, Lombardi U, Fig LM, Cameron OG, Liberzon I. Medial frontal cortex
involvement in PTSD symptoms: A SPECT study. Journal of Psychiatric Research 1999;33:259–
264. [PubMed: 10367992]
Page 65

Figure 1.
Anatomical relationships between various temporal regions. (A) Three-D figure of the
human brain (frontal lobes are to the left), with amygdala and hippocampus indicated. (B)
View of temporal regions from below; top of the figure is the front of the brain. (C) Cut-
away of medial temporal lobe structures as viewed from the front (adapted with permission
from Figure 1A of Dolcos, F., LaBar, K. S., & Cabeza, R. [2004]. Interaction between the
amygdala and the medial temporal lobe memory system predicts better memory for
emotional events. Neuron, 42, 855–863). A-amygdala, E-entorhinal cortex, FG-fusiform
gyrus, H-hippocampus, ITG-inferior temporal gyrus, MTG-middle temporal gyrus, PR-
perirhinal cortex (sometimes referred to in the literature as anterior parahippocampal gyrus),
PH-parahippocampal cortex (sometimes referred to in the literature as posterior
parahippocampal gyrus), TP-temporal pole.
Page 66

Figure 2.
Schematic of the relationship between MTL regions with summary of several current
hypotheses regarding their functions. MTL-medial temporal lobes; PR-perirhinal cortex;
PH-parahippocampal cortex. Superscripts refer to: 1Davachi (2006); 2Mayes et al.
(2007); 3Diana et al. (2007); 4Eichenbaum et al. (2007); 5Awipi and Davachi (2008).
Page 67

Figure 3.
Lateral (left) and medial (right) views of the cortex. Numbers indicate approximate
Brodmann Areas (BA). Abbreviations for regions (areas are approximate) are: AG-angular
gyrus; CC-corpus collosum; CG-cingulate gyrus; Cu-cuneus; FG-fusiform gyrus; FP-frontal
pole; IFG-inferior frontal gyrus; IOG-inferior occipital gyrus; IPS- intraparietal sulcus; ITG-
inferior temporal gyrus; LG-lingual gyrus; LOG-lateral occipital gyrus; MdFG-medial
frontal gyrus; MFG-middle frontal gyrus; MTG-middle temporal gyrus; OrbG-orbital gyrus;
PCC-posterior cingulate cortex; PCu-precuneus; PHG-parahippocampal gyrus; PrCG-
precentral gyrus; PoCG-postcentral gyrus; RSC-retrosplenial cortex; SFG-superior frontal
gyrus; SOG-superior occipital gyrus; SMG-supramarginal gyrus; SPL-superior parietal
lobule; STG-superior temporal gyrus; TP-temporal pole. In addition, entorhinal cortex (not
labeled) is primarily comprised of BA 28, 34; perirhinal cortex-BA 35, 36.
Page 68

Figure 4.
Summary of some hypotheses about functional specificity of prefrontal cortex (PFC) in
source memory, and example references, as described in text. Nomenclature for anatomical
regions varies historically and between labs, but generally, PFC areas involved in source
memory include: Medial (hatch lines in axial view) and lateral (speckled in axial view) areas
of anterior PFC (aPFC; primarily BA 10); aPFC is also sometimes referred to as fronto-polar
cortex, or rostral PFC. Dorsolateral PFC (DLPFC = primarily dorsal BA 10, BAs 46, 9, but
some investigators also include BA 8 and dorsal BA 6; mid-DLPFC = primarily BAs 9, 46;
posterior DLPFC = primarily BA 9). Ventrolateral PFC (VLPFC = primarily BAs 47, 45,
44, but some investigators also include BAs 11 and ventral 6; anterior VLPFC = primarily
Page 69

BA 47; mid-VLPFC = primarily BA 45; posterior VLPFC = primarily BA 44); VLPFC is
also sometimes referred to as inferior frontal cortex (IFC). The inferior frontal sulcus is
usually taken as the boundary between DLPFC and VLPFC (e.g., Kuhl & Wagner, 2009).
Superscripts refer to: 1Blumenfeld and Ranganath (2007); 2Buckner and Wheeler
(2001); 3Cabeza et al. (2003); 4Dobbins and Han (2006); 5Dobbins and Wagner
(2005); 6Kelley et al. (1998); 7Lepage et al. (2000); 8McDermott et al. (1999); 9Mitchell et
al., 2004; 10Mitchell et al. (2008); 11Nolde, Johnson, and Raye, (1998); 12Petrides
(2002); 13Ranganath and Blumenfeld, 2008; 14Raye et al. (2000); 15Rugg et al. (2002; see
also, Hayama et al., 2008); 16Simons et al. (2008); 17Simons, Gilbert, et al.,
(2005); 18Vinogradov et al. (2006; see also Vinogradov et al., 2008); 19Wagner, Poldrack, et
al. (1998).
Page 70

Page 71
Table 1
Summary of SM-related behavioral and brain activity differences in populations that exhibit behavioral source
memory deficits, as discussed in text.
Aging
Behavioral Findings
•
Memory binding deficit (feature combination deficit > item deficit)
•
SM deficits > item deficits
•
R deficits > F deficits
•
Poor calibration of responses on subjective (e.g., confidence) vs objective (e.g., accuracy) memory measures
•
Overweighting of semantic information
•
Preserved SM for affective information (and maybe overweighting)
•
Increased false memory
Imaging Findings
•
Some MTL atrophy, dysfunction (especially hippocampus) in binding and episodic encoding tasks
•
PFC atrophy disproportionate to other brain areas, dysfunction (especially dorsolateral PFC); SM-related left lateral PFC deficit
related to evaluating specific information
•
Reduced PFC activity for SM in areas active in young adults, with sometimes greater activity in contralateral PFC, or other, areas in
older adult “good performers” (compensatory?)
•
Changes in PFC-MTL (increase?) and MTL-posterior (decrease?) functional connectivity
•
Reduced specificity of activity in posterior regions (e.g., extrastriate cortex)
•
Relatively preserved amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex function in emotional SM tasks
Schizophrenia
Behavioral Findings
•
Memory binding deficit (feature combination deficit > item deficit)
•
Hallucinations and deficits in laboratory reality monitoring tasks (e.g., self vs other)
Imaging Findings
•
MTL structural changes (e.g., reduced volume), dysfunction (especially hippocampus?)
•
PFC structural changes, dysfunction
•
Abnormal PFC-hippocampus connectivity during working memory tasks
•
Reduced STG volume (related to severity of hallucinations), dysfunction (deficit when associating content of speech with source)
•
Attenuated difference between activity for associative vs item memory in left DLPFC, ACC, STG during encoding
•
Attenuated difference between activity for associative vs item memory in left DLPFC, right inferior PFC, medial PFC, superior
parietal cortex at test
•
Deficits in medial anterior PFC during reality monitoring tasks
•
For hallucinating patients:
–
more wide-spread activity in left BA 40, 44 during reality monitoring judgments (was the word said or heard?)
–
disruption in modulatory relationship between speech generation (e.g., left inferior frontal cortex) and speech perception
(e.g., temporal cortex) areas
PTSD
Behavioral Findings
•
Likely memory binding deficits (feature combination deficit > item deficit), but evidence not conclusive

Page 72
•
Increased attention to negative information
•
Fragmented, impoverished episodic memory
•
Reduced R responses
•
SM deficits > item deficits (for both neutral and emotional information)
Imaging Findings
•
Hippocampal structural changes (e.g., reduced volume), dysfunction (attenuated activity during encoding and remembering of
emotional information)
•
PFC structural changes
•
Amygdala structural changes, dysfunction
•
Attenuated PFC, middle temporal cortex, and precuneus activity, but greater superior temporal and parahippocampal activity during
associative encoding; possible deficit in PFC-temporal functional connectivity during encoding
•
Attenuated PFC and temporal cortex activity during test in associative tasks
•
Exaggerated amygdala response, reduced medial PFC, hippocampal activity during exposure to emotional stimuli
Depression
Behavioral Findings
•
Over-general episodic memories
•
SM deficits
•
Rumination
•
Memory bias for negative information
Imaging Findings
•
Sustained amygdala activity, attenuated left DLPFC activity during processing of negative information
•
Increased amygdala-hippocampal functional connectivity during encoding of negative information
•
Increased activity in posterior “self” areas (posterior cingulate, inferior parietal lobes) when processing negative information
•
Disruption of control circuit (cingulate, amygdala, DLPFC) involved in emotion regulation
Notes. ACC-anterior cingulate cortex; DLPFC-dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; F-familiarity (know); MTL-medial temporal lobes; PFC-prefrontal
cortex; R-recollection (remember); SM-source memory/source monitoring; STG-superior temporal gyrus.

Page 73
Table 2
Some continuing issues for a cognitive neuroscience of source memory.
•
Clarifying features
–
Distinguishing between encoded features, activated/revived features, and used (weighted, evaluated) features
–
Differentiating the “self” as a feature, the originator, and the experiencer, of events
–
Assessing emotion as a feature of memory vs a modulator of other feature information
–
Clarifying how feature A may have an impact on judgments about feature B, and how information is imported (or
cumulated) across representations
–
Characterizing the relation between information that yields a feeling of familiarity and information that yields a feeling
of more specific recollection
–
Identifying the nature of the information (e.g., features, feature combinations) to which specific brain areas, or networks
of areas, are sensitive
–
Specifying brain areas, and/or dynamic networks, associated with subjective ratings of vividness (e.g., MCQ)
•
Clarifying processes
–
Specifying the component processes recruited during source memory (e.g., refreshing, rehearsing, noting, shifting,
retrieving) and how they are coordinated during encoding and remembering
–
Differentiating brain regions, networks, and temporal dynamics associated with
♦
setting and implementing agendas (e.g., for organization, feature binding) during the encoding of
events
♦
making source attributions (e.g., retrieval orientation; looking for/weighting detail of type X; self-
cuing; feature activation; evaluation/monitoring).
–
Identifying the conditions leading to, and functional significance of, increases/decreases of activity in a brain area vs
increases/decreases in functional connectivity between areas
•
Understanding disrupted source memory
–
Capitalizing on advances on the issues noted above in the systematic study of
♦
groups showing source memory deficits (e.g., older adults, individuals with schizophrenia, PTSD,
depression)
♦
individual differences related to errors in source memory (e.g., imagery ability, suggestibility,
anxiety)