Elucidating the neural correlates of related false memories using 
a systematic measure of perceptual relatedness
Indira C. Turney*, Nancy A. Dennis
The Department of Psychology, The Pennsylvania State University, 450 Moore Building, 
University Park, PA 16802, USA
Abstract
Previous memory research has exploited the perceptual similarities between lures and targets in 
order to evoke false memories. Nevertheless, while some studies have attempted to use lures that 
are objectively more similar than others, no study has systematically controlled for perceptual 
overlap between target and lure items and its role in accounting for false alarm rates or the neural 
processes underlying such perceptual false memories. The current study looked to fill this gap 
in the literature by using a face-morphing program to systematically control for the amount of 
perceptual overlap between lures and targets. Our results converge with previous studies in finding 
a pattern of differences between true and false memories. Most importantly, expanding upon this 
work, parametric analyses showed false memory activity increases with respect to the similarity 
between lures and targets within bilateral middle temporal gyri and right medial prefrontal cortex 
(mPFC). Moreover, this pattern of activation was unique to false memories and could not be 
accounted for by relatedness alone. Connectivity analyses further find that activity in the mPFC 
and left middle temporal gyrus co-vary, suggestive of gist-based monitoring within the context of 
false memories. Interestingly, neither the MTL nor the fusiform face area exhibited modulation 
as a function of target-lure relatedness. Overall, these results provide insight into the processes 
underlying false memories and further enhance our understanding of the role perceptual similarity 
plays in supporting false memories.
Keywords
Relatedness; False memories; Neuroimaging; Perceptual similarity
Introduction
The ability to accurately remember previous experiences and differentiate between 
previously encountered information and new information is critical to maintaining accurate 
*Corresponding author. ict105@psu.edu (I.C. Turney). 
Conflict of interest
The experimental protocol employed in the present study was approved for ethical treatment of human participants by the Institutional 
Review Board at Penn State University, and the experimental data were collected with the understanding and written consent of each 
participant. We have no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, that would preclude a fair review or publication of this manuscript. 
We have no contracts relating to this research and no financial interest in this work. This manuscript is not submitted for publication 
elsewhere, nor have the results been previously published. All contents of this manuscript have been reviewed by all authors.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
Neuroimage. 2017 February 01; 146: 940–950. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.09.005.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

memory. However, several factors make this distinction difficult, including the amount of 
perceptual similarity shared between old and new information. In the field of memory, the 
inaccurate identification of a new item, irrespective of its similarity to a studied item, is 
known as a false memory. In the domain of false memories, perceptual overlap between 
targets and lures has shown to result in an increased rate of false memories through the 
influence of gist-based processes (i.e., memory for general features of an episodic event) 
(Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006; Gutchess and Schacter, 2012; Slotnick and Schacter, 2004; Stark 
et al., 2010). While perceptual false memories have been widely studied in the literature, 
research has only taken a cursory investigation into the role of perceptual overlap between 
lures and targets in false memories. Specifically, previous false memory studies have not 
systematically controlled how the specific degree of perceptual overlap between lures and 
targets influences the neural mechanisms underlying false memories. To address this issue, 
the current study aimed to expand upon previous perceptual false memory studies by 
systematically varying the degree of perceptual relatedness between lures and targets.
One prominent theory of false memories, the Fuzzy Trace Theory, suggests false memory 
errors result as a consequence of an overreliance on gist traces of the encoding event at the 
expense of a reliance on item-specific details from encoding at the time of memory retrieval 
(Brainerd and Reyna, 1990). Furthermore, the amount of false memories to lure items is 
suggested to be a function of the amount of perceptual similarity or gist overlap between 
targets and lures. Previous research suggests that the sharing of gist traces between targets 
and lures is a critical factor in accounting for the rate of false memories (e.g., Gutchess and 
Schacter, 2012; Koutstaal and Schacter, 1997; Roediger and Mcdermott, 1995). Specifically, 
individuals make more false alarms to lures that share perceptual properties (i.e., via shape 
or color) with targets than to items that do not. Yet, prior neuroimaging studies have failed 
to systematically control for the degree of perceptual overlap or relatedness between targets 
and lures (but see Gutchess and Schacter (2012) for parametric increases in gist encoding).
In general, perceptual false memory paradigms exploit the perceptual overlap in features 
between target and lure items to induce false memories (e.g., Gutchess and Schacter, 
2012; Koutstaal and Schacter, 1997; Slotnick and Schacter, 2004). Specifically, participants 
are presented with pictures of one or more exemplars from various categories during 
encoding (e.g., ‘chair’; ‘dog’). During retrieval target items are intermixed with related 
lures (category exemplars that were not presented at encoding) and unrelated lures (new 
items whose category was not presented during encoding, e.g., Dennis et al., 2012; Koutstaal 
and Schacter, 1997; Slotnick and Schacter, 2004). False alarm rates to such related lures 
often mirror or closely approximate hit rates to target items. That is, perceptually related 
lures are likely to be classified as “old” at a similar rate as targets (Glanzer and Adams, 
1985; Hockley, 2008; Nosofsky et al., 2011) as participants have difficulty in distinguishing 
between the two related items, while unrelated lures are relatively easily rejected. While 
some studies have attempted to use lures that are objectively more similar than others 
(Bowman and Dennis, 2016), no study has systematically controlled for the degree of 
perceptual overlap between targets and lures in order to investigate the influence of 
perceptual similarity on false memories.
Turney and Dennis
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Coinciding with this behavioral findings, neuroimaging studies examining perceptual based 
false memories have found differences in neural activation supporting true and false 
memories (for review, see Dennis et al. (2015)). For example, studies have shown that 
perceptual false memory retrieval in which there was a shared semantic component (e.g., 
similar category membership between targets and lures) and shared perceptual features, rely 
on processing within left middle and superior temporal gyri and late visual cortices (e.g., 
Dennis et al., 2012; Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006; Slotnick and Schacter, 2004). Researchers 
have interpreted this activation as evidence of an overreliance on perceptual gist and 
general processing of object identity supporting memory retrieval. Furthermore, as increased 
activation in lateral temporal cortex is also found to support false compared to true 
memories, researchers have suggested it reflects increased reliance on gist information, in 
the absence of a detailed or item-based retrieval signal (for review, see Dennis et al. (2015)).
Activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) has also been shown to differentiate between false 
memories to perceptually related lures and true memories (Cabeza et al., 2001; Garoff-Eaton 
et al., 2007; Kensinger and Schacter, 2006; Kim and Cabeza, 2007b; Kubota et al., 2006; 
Okado and Stark, 2003; Schacter et al., 1996). Studies have attributed this increased 
PFC activity to an increased need for monitoring, reconstructive processes, and semantic 
elaboration supporting false memories—with the specific interpretation dependent upon 
the precise locus of PFC activation. A recent meta-analysis found the most consistently 
activated frontal region underlying false memories is the medial PFC (mPFC) (Kurkela and 
Dennis, 2016), which has been associated with greater reliance on retrieval monitoring and 
evaluation processes necessary when making difficult memory decisions related to critical 
lures (e.g., Hofer et al., 2007; Iidaka et al., 2012).
Another notable difference between true and false retrieval is the finding of increased 
activity in early visual processing regions (i.e., BA 17 & 18) for true compared to 
false memories. This has been interpreted within the context of the ‘sensory reactivation 
hypothesis,’ (e.g., Marche et al., 2010; Mather et al., 1997; Norman and Schacter, 1997). 
Specifically, the sensory reactivation hypothesis postulates that, by virtue of having been 
presented previously, target items will elicit retrieval-related reactivation of the encoding 
episode in sensory regions that were involved in their initial encoding (e.g., Vaidya et al., 
2002; Wheeler et al., 2000). This is in contrast to related lures, which on the other hand, 
were not previously presented and thus are not accompanied by this heightened sensory 
signal at retrieval. However, despite strong evidence supporting the sensory reactivation 
hypothesis, not all perceptual false memory studies find this dissociation (e.g., Garoff-
Eaton et al., 2006; Gutchess and Schacter, 2012). For example, using categorized pictures, 
Gutchess and Schacter (2012) found that false memories associated with a stronger semantic 
gist representation (which was manipulated by presenting groupings of either 4, 8, or 14 
exemplars per category of stimuli at encoding), resulted in increased activation in both 
the hippocampus and visual processing regions (BA 17 and 37). One explanation for this 
difference across studies may be related to the properties of the lure stimuli in relation to 
the target stimuli. That is, perhaps when related lures and targets share significant perceptual 
overlap with one another, the presentation of the lure at retrieval is sufficient to reactivate the 
perceptual experience from encoding (Gutchess and Schacter, 2012), compared to when they 
Turney and Dennis
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

share less overlap. However, no study has investigated this by systematically controlling for 
the perceptual similarity between targets and lures.
Further still, another region that has shown varied findings with respect to distinguishing 
true and false memories is the medial temporal lobe (MTL). While some studies have found 
the hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) to support both true and false retrieval (e.g., 
Dennis et al., 2012; Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006; Gutchess and Schacter, 2012; Kahn et al., 
2004; Slotnick and Schacter, 2004; Stark et al., 2010; von Zerssen et al., 2001), others find 
greater MTL involvement associated with true compared to false memories (e.g., Cabeza et 
al., 2001; Dennis et al., 2012,, 2008b; Giovanello et al., 2009; Kahn et al., 2004; Kensinger 
and Schacter, 2006; Kim and Cabeza, 2007b; Paz-Alonso et al., 2008). Studies suggest 
that greater MTL activation for true memories reflects greater recovery of sensory details 
associated with targets (Cabeza et al., 2001; Kahn et al., 2004; Okado and Stark, 2003), 
while others suggested this neural increase reflects the role of the hippocampus in binding 
together true details from past events (Kensinger and Schacter, 2006), or recollection 
processes (Dennis et al., 2012; Kim and Cabeza, 2007b). Interestingly, despite the foregoing 
findings, a recent meta-analysis found no consistent role for the MTL in supporting false 
memories (for review, see Kurkela and Dennis (2016)).
Such varied results may reflect several factors including methodological differences across 
studies and/or the measured degree of overlap between the related lure and the target item 
from the same category. With respect to item relatedness, research shows that the anterior 
portions of the MTL track relatedness (Bowman and Dennis, 2015; Daselaar et al., 2006; 
Kirchhoff et al., 2000; Tulving et al., 1996) and reflects bottom-up novelty signals, triggered 
by less related items. Furthermore, researchers posit that this increase in activation reflects 
a mismatch or recall-to-reject signal within the MTL (Bowman and Dennis, 2015; Kumaran 
and Maguire, 2009), beyond that found for item novelty alone (Brown and Aggleton, 2001) 
or unrelated novelty. However, given that previous studies have not systematically controlled 
the perceptual relatedness between targets and lures, it remains unclear whether varying 
the perceptual overlap between the two stimuli would influence the strength of the MTL’s 
novelty signal with respect to false memories.
One critical issue in the aforementioned perceptual false memory studies is that 
‘relatedness’, has typically been defined as membership within a given category of stimuli 
(e.g., chairs, dogs). Despite overlap in category membership, there likely exists a fair degree 
of variance amongst related lures with respect to perceptual overlap with the target(s). 
We posit that this variance may be a critical factor in elucidating the neural components 
mediating false memories. To that end we aim to clarify and extend previous findings with 
regards to the neural correlates underlying false memories to perceptually related lures 
by controlling for the amount of perceptual overlap between the lures and targets, and 
elucidating neural activity that supports false memories as a function of this increase in 
perceptual similarity. As such, we posit that, though several neural regions have shown 
overlap between true and false memories, there may only be a subset of regions that are 
increasingly engaged as relatedness is strengthened. Specifically, activity within the lateral 
temporal cortex, PFC, and MTL, as well as stimulus-specific processing regions, such 
as visual cortex, may show systematic increases in activity as a function of target/lure 
Turney and Dennis
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

similarity. Such increases in activity would reflect the influence of gist and perceptual 
relatedness on the cognitive and neural mechanisms supporting false memories.
A category of stimuli that is well suited to investigating perceptual overlap between targets 
and lures is faces. That is, given the common structural organization amongst facial features, 
face stimuli present a unique means by which to examine the role of perceptual relatedness 
in false memories. Specifically, a given face can be morphed with a second, distinct face to 
form a unique face that shares perceptual properties with the original face. As a result, we 
can obtain a systematic measure of similarity between a target and lure (e.g., a morphed face 
can include features that are 70% from one face and 30% from another). To this end, the 
current study utilized both target faces at retrieval (Parent X) and lure faces consisting of 
morphed faces that incorporated varying degrees of Parent X and a new face (Parent Y), as 
well as unmorphed, Parent Y faces. Specifically, morphed faces were created by varying the 
percentage of perceptual overlap between a target face (Parent X) and another face, not used 
in the experiment (Parent Y) to obtain multiple levels of lure relatedness [70:30 (target:new 
face), 50:50 (target:new face), 30:70 (target:new face)] (see Table 1). Additionally, given that 
all targets and lures were generated from a single category (faces), we were able to reduce 
the influence of semantic processing to false memories more generally.
We anticipate differences in true and false memory retrieval to be consistent with previous 
studies of false memory for related information (for review, seeKurkela and Dennis, 2016). 
Critical to our investigation of the effect of target-lure relatedness, we used a parametric 
modulation analysis with respect to false memories at each morph step in order to elucidate 
neural activity underlying false memories as a function of target-lure relatedness. Thus, 
we predict an increase rate of false alarms as a linear function of increased relatedness 
between related lures and targets. Additionally, we predict that systematic increases in 
perceptual relatedness will be associated with increased activation in regions within the 
PFC, reflecting monitoring and evaluation processes and in the MTL, reflecting tracking of 
relatedness and overlap between target and lures. Additionally, we predict that systematic 
increases in perceptual relatedness will also be associated with increased activation within 
the visual cortex, including fusiform face area (FFA), (which has been shown to support 
the perceptual processing of faces; Hoffman and Haxby (2000) and Kanwisher and Yovel 
(2006)), reflecting the increased familiarity of the related face lure to that of the target. 
Finally, we predict that systematic increases in perceptual relatedness will be associated with 
increased activity within the lateral and medial temporal cortices, reflecting the involvement 
of gist processing and processing of related information, respectively.
Material and methods
Participants
Twenty-five right-handed young adults (17 female) between the ages of 18–31 years old 
[mean age = 23 years, (SD = 3.74)] were recruited from The Pennsylvania State University 
community and received monetary compensation for their participation. All participants 
were screened for history of neurological disorders and psychiatric illness, alcoholism, 
drug abuse, and learning disabilities. All participants provided written informed consent 
and all procedures were approved by The Pennsylvania State University’s Institutional 
Turney and Dennis
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Review Board. Prior to participation in the study, all participants successfully completed 
the Mars Letter Contrast Sensitivity Test (Arditi, 2005), which examines peak visual 
contrast. This test was included to assess processing of relatively low retinal spatial 
frequencies, confirming that participants could perceptually notice the difference between 
items, especially at relatively low relatedness levels. The average log contrast sensitivity 
(CS) score for both eyes was 1.86 (.04), which fell in the normal range of 1.72–.92 
for middle-age/young adults. Additionally, in a subsequent perceptual discrimination task, 
paired sample t-tests assessing performance revealed that participants were able to correctly 
discriminate between targets and all levels of morphed lures (all p’s o .001).
Stimuli
Experimental task: The stimuli consisted of 228 pictures of adult faces (ages 18– 39). 
Faces were evenly divided by gender and presented with neutral expressions. Half of the 
faces were Caucasian and the other half were an even mixture of minority races (African 
Americans, Indians, Asians, and Hispanics). Faces were chosen from The Color Facial 
Recognition Technology (FERET) database (Phillips et al., 1998) and the AR Face database 
(Martinez and Benavente, 1998). The background of each image was removed and pictures 
were cropped and resized to an approximate size of 384 × 514 pixels. Images were presented 
focally and equated for resolution and were displayed at a screen resolution of 1024 (H) × 
768 (V) at 75 Hz. At the viewing distance of 143 cm, the display area was 20° (H) ° 16° (V) 
with experimental stimuli subtending 5° (H) × 4° (V).
Face morphing was done using Abrosoft Fantamorph software version 5.0 (http://
www.fantamorph.com/overview.html). Each face was marked with key identification points 
(referred to as nodes) that identified key features of each face. While the total number of 
nodes on each face varied to allow for precision of morphing within a pair. Across faces, 
on average, this included 50 nodes for the face outline, 40 for hair outline, 10 for the nose, 
30 for the lips, and 6 for the neck area. Aside from considerations for race and gender, all 
morph pairs were randomly selected. While we did not control for visual properties of the 
faces (i.e., symmetry, specific facial characteristics) per se, we utilized faces with a neutral 
expression from the identified face databases and we also ensured that none of the faces had 
any distinct marks (e.g., tattoos), jewelry (e.g., earrings), or other identifying features (e.g., 
glasses).
During encoding, participants viewed 96 original unmorphed faces (parent X; Table 1). Of 
the 96 study faces, 48 were brought to retrieval as target faces. The remaining encoding 
faces (48) were morphed with a unique new face (using one of 48 parent Y faces) to 
create 16 morphed/blended faces in each of the following categories—70:30, 50:50, and 
30:70—where the first number represents the percentage of the ‘parent X’ face and the latter 
represents the percentage of the ‘Parent Y’ face used to create the blended image (note 
that parent Y face was never seen during encoding). An additional 16 uniquely, unmorphed 
Parent Y faces (0:100) were also used as lures during retrieval.
Furthermore, in order to ensure that each related lure was perceptually distinguishable from 
its target parent face we piloted all morphed and parent faces prior to testing in a perceptual 
discrimination task in an independent group of participants (N = 30). Each parent face 
Turney and Dennis
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

was presented focally on the computer next to the corresponding morphed face to be used 
during retrieval. Face pairs were presented for 4 s and participants were asked to respond 
‘identical’ or ‘different’. Morphed faces that could not be distinguished from the parent face 
(rated as identical more than 20% of the time) were replaced such that all faces used in the 
experimental paradigm were rated as ‘different’ with a rate of at least 80%. Participants in 
the current study also completed this perceptual discrimination task after retrieval to verify 
perceptual discriminability between targets and morphs.
Procedure
Participants first performed the contrast sensitivity task to ensure eligibility to participate 
in the study. Once participants performed above criteria, they were given a brief overview 
of the study, along with task instructions. Encoding, retrieval, and a dynamic face localizer 
(see below for details and rationale) then took place in the scanner. Images were displayed 
by COGENT in MATLAB (Mathworks). Images were projected onto a screen and viewed 
by participants through a mirror attached to the head coil. All images were presented in 
the center of the screen with response options displayed below each image. Behavioral 
responses were recorded using a 4-bottom-response box. Scanner noise was reduced with 
headphones and earplugs, and additional cushioning was used in the head coil to minimize 
head motion.
Encoding was evenly divided into 4 runs, each lasting approximately 4 min. During each 
run, participants were presented with 24 faces, each face presented for a total of 4 s. 
During the face presentation, participants were asked to rate each face, on a scale of 1–4, 
based on how typical (difficult to spot in a crowd) or atypical (distinct or easy to spot 
in a crowd) the face appeared. The presentation of each face was followed by a variable 
interstimulus interval (1–5 s). Following encoding, there was a 20-min delay period during 
which structural images (MPRAGE & DTI) were acquired and the instructions of the 
retrieval task were given.
During retrieval (also in the scanner), participants were shown 112 faces including 48 
targets, 48 related lures (morphed faces), and 16 unmorphed lures, evenly distributed across 
4 runs. The images were pseudorandomly sorted to ensure that no more than 3 images 
from any one trial type appeared in a row. Each face was displayed for 4 s followed by 
a variable inter trial interval (ITI) ranging between 1000 and 5000 ms. During retrieval, 
participants made old/new recognition memory responses using confidence ratings (old-high 
confidence; old-low confidence; new-low confidence; new-high confidence). Participants 
were instructed that some faces might seem similar to that which was presented during the 
study phase, but only to respond ‘old’ if the exact face was presented at study. Immediately 
following retrieval, the dynamic face localizer was presented, which included a silent, 
fluid concatenation of short (15 s) movie vignettes (32 in total), lasting approximately 9 
min. No responses were required; participants were instructed to simply pay attention to 
each of the short vignettes. Subsequently, outside of the scanner, all participants completed 
the perceptual discrimination task to verify differentiation between parent faces and their 
respective morphs used during retrieval. Only data from retrieval are analyzed in the current 
study. Encoding data will be presented in a subsequent manuscript.
Turney and Dennis
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Image acquisition
Images were acquired using a Siemens Prisma Fit 3T scanner equipped with a 32-channel 
head coil. Functional EPI images were then prescribed approximately parallel to the AC-PC 
plane with a 30° steep angle. Echo-planar functional images for encoding and retrieval were 
acquired using a descending acquisition, 2500 ms TR, 25 ms TE, 240 mm FOV, a 802 
matrix, 42 axial slices with 3 mm slice thickness resulting in 3 mm isotropic voxels. For 
the functional dynamic face localizer, Echo-planar functional images were acquired using a 
descending acquisition, 3000 ms TR, 30 ms TE, 240 mm FOV, a 802 matrix, 42 axial slices 
with 3 mm slice thickness resulting in 3 mm isotropic voxels. An MPRAGE was acquired 
with a 1650 ms TR, 2.03 ms TE, 256 mm field of view (FOV), 2562 matrix, 160 axial slices, 
and 1 mm slice thickness for each participant.
fMRI analysis
Functional data were preprocessed and analyzed with SPM8 (Statistical Parametric 
Mapping; Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). 
Images were first checked for scanner and movement artifacts using a timeseries diagnostic 
function TSDiffAna (Freiburg Brain Imaging) in MATLAB. Time-series data were realigned 
and images were then co-registered to the individual’s T1 image. Functional data were 
then spatially normalized into a standard stereotaxic space using the Montreal Neurological 
Institute (MNI) EPI template implemented in SPM8, including resampling to the original 
voxel size of 3 × 3 × 3 mm. A high-pass filter (128 s) was included in the model to correct 
for scanner drift. Finally, the volumes were spatially smoothed using a 6-mm isotropic 
Gaussian kernel.
We utilized both the traditional contrast approach and a parametric modulation analysis at 
the whole-brain level to assess the neural correlates mediating false memories a) overall and 
b) systematically as a function of relatedness between targets and lures. Trial-related activity 
was modeled with a general linear model (GLM) using a stick function corresponding to 
trial onsets convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function (hrf). In order to 
increase power in all analyses, we collapsed across confidence levels in order to create four 
regressors of interest: hits, misses, false alarms, and correct rejections. ‘No response’ trials 
and motion parameters were also modeled as regressors of no interest. Direct comparisons 
between the two trial types (hits and false alarms) allowed us to investigate unique neural 
activity associated with each memory type. In order to examine the linear trends across 
relatedness for false memories, a linear parametric analysis was conducted. Specifically, we 
modeled a linear increase in false alarms as a function of relatedness (70:30 = 4; 50:50 = 3, 
30:70 = 2, 0:100 = 1). This regressor allowed for the identification of regions whose activity 
correlated linearly (i.e., increasing as relatedness increased) with respect to the different 
levels of target/lure relatedness. We included unmorphed Parent Y faces (faces that were 
not morphed with target faces) in the parametric analysis because a) they were perceptually 
less similar to the target faces than the 30:70 faces and yet b) they were still items from the 
same category (faces). Thus, we felt that they continued to reflect a measurable difference in 
relatedness between lure and target items.
Turney and Dennis
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In order to ensure activity in our parametric false memory contrast was not associated with 
relatedness more generally, but was specific to false memory activity, we also examined 
activity that parametrically modulated correct rejections as relatedness to targets increased 
and used that activation as an exclusive mask (p o .05 uncorrected) in the false memory 
parametric analysis. All individual statistical parametric maps were subjected to a random 
effects analysis and subsequently submitted to a second-level group analysis.
Finally, in order to further clarify results from the parametric analysis, we conducted a 
connectivity analysis using generalized psychological interaction analysis (gPPI; McLaren 
et al., 2012) in SPM8. Specifically we used the mPFC region identified in the parametric 
analysis as a seed and investigated connectivity between the PFC and the lateral temporal 
cortex in order to determine whether increased activity across both regions were correlated 
with respect to neural recruitment supporting false memories. Specifically, a spherical mask 
with an 8 mm radius was generated around the peak-activated voxel (MNI coordinates: 6, 
53, 10) from the mPFC cluster identified in the false memory parametric contrast. This 
mask was used to define individual seed regions within the gPPI analysis framework adapted 
from the Generalized PPI Toolbox (McLaren et al., 2012; https://www.nitrc.org/projects/
gppi). PPI contrasts directly compared connectivity of all false memories. We then ran a 
one-sample t-test at the group level in order to examine group effects within a mask of the 
lateral temporal activation also identified in the false parametric contrast. By focusing on 
connectivity between these two regions we were able to investigate whether increases in 
monitoring activity were brought online with respect to increases in gist activity within the 
context of false memories.
In order to identify significant results in all contrasts of interest, we employed Monte Carlo 
simulations, implemented by 3dClust-Sim in AFNI version 16.0 (Cox and Hyde, 1997) to 
determine activation that was corrected for multiple comparisons at p < 0.05. The input 
to this simulation was the search space from a grey matter mask derived from the Wake 
Forest University Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL) PickAtlas, available within SPM. 
It utilizes an automated anatomical parcellation of the spatially normalized single-subject 
high-resolution T1 volume provided by the Montreal Neurological Institute (Collins et 
al., 1998) and is available as a commonly used software toolbox (Lancaster et al., 2000; 
Maldjian et al., 2003; Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002), intrinsic smoothness in mm (x y z 
= 11.21) and p < 0.005. Results indicated a cluster extent of 61 resampled voxels was 
required to correct for multiple comparisons at p < 0.05 at the whole brain level. Additional 
simulations were run to determine a correction specific to a priori regions of interest (ROIs) 
in the MTL and the superior/middle temporal gyri (see details below on defining ROIs used 
for creating the following masks). Results indicated that, within the MTL mask an extent 
threshold of 10 voxels in association with an uncorrected p < 0.005, resulted in a corrected 
threshold of p < 0.05, as did 17 voxels extent in the superior temporal/middle temporal gyri 
(STG/MTG) mask.
Defining regions of interest: Based on our a priori predictions regarding the FFA, MTL, 
and superior and middle temporal gyri, we created ROI maps defining each region for ROI 
analyses (in addition to the full brain analyses conducted for each contrast of interest). 
The MTL and lateral temporal cortices were defined using anatomically defined regions 
Turney and Dennis
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

identified by the AAL pickatlas. More specifically, the MTL ROI included the left and right 
parahippocampal gyrus, amygdala and hippocampus. The lateral temporal cortex included 
the left and right middle and superior temporal gyri.
Finally, because the FFA is defined functionally and not anatomically, it is typical to use 
a face localizer to identify an independent measure of FFA from that of the experimental 
stimuli. Thus, similar to face processing studies (Scherf et al., 2010; Avidan et al., 2005), the 
FFA was functionally defined using a dynamic face localizer task (Adapted from Hasson et 
al. (2004)) that mapped face-sensitive regions in each participant. Stimuli consisted of silent, 
fluid blocks of short (15-s) movie vignettes (32 in total). Each block contained video clips 
of people and faces (e.g., individuals laughing, angry, neutral), buildings (e.g., skyscrapers, 
houses in residential and business areas, etc.), navigation through natural landscapes (e.g., 
plains, meadows, mountains, oceans, etc.), and miscellaneous common objects (e.g., moving 
cars, running faucets, etc.). In order to isolate face processing, beta weights were generated 
at the subject levels for each condition (faces, places, buildings, navigation). Next, faces 
were contrasted against all other categories in order to compute face selectivity. Then, a 
one-sample t-test was conducted across subjects in order to create a group-level contrast 
map that isolated FFA bilaterally. Overall, unlike commonly used face localizers that utilize 
static photographs, this dynamic face localizer allowed for a natural exploration of the visual 
environment. It also provides robust category-selective activation in ventral temporal regions 
(Avidan et al., 2005).
Results
Behavioral
In order to examine the effects of stimulus type (targets, lures) on the proportion of ‘old’ 
responses, a paired sample t-test across ‘old’ responses to targets and lures (collapsed across 
relatedness) was performed. Results showed that participants made significantly more ‘old’ 
responses to targets than to lures [t(24) = 15.39, p < .001]. In order to more specifically 
investigate the effects of levels of relatedness on false memories, a repeated measure 
ANOVA was conducted on false alarm rates across the differing levels of relatedness. 
Results revealed a main effect of relatedness in which the rate of false alarms increased 
linearly, as relatedness increased, [F(1, 24) = 112.20 p < 0.001]. Fig. 1 provides a visual 
display of this finding. Post-hoc pairwise Bonferroni corrected comparisons showed that 
false alarm rates for the 70:30 related lures significantly differed from all the other lures, 
50:50 significantly differed from 70:30 and 0:100 lures, but not from 30:70 lures, and 30:70 
significantly differed from 70:30 and 0:100 lures (see Table 1). Using reaction time as the 
dependent variable, another repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant linear effect 
of relatedness on reaction time when making false alarms [F(1, 24) = 19.44, p < .001], such 
that reaction increased as relatedness between targets and lures increased (see Table 1).
Imaging
True and false retrieval: Analysis of neural differences between true and false retrieval 
showed that true, compared to false memories, elicited greater activity in bilateral early 
Turney and Dennis
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

visual cortex (BA 18) and right PHG. In contrast, false memories elicited greater activity in 
right superior frontal gyrus and left STG (see Table 2).
Parametric modulation: Table 3 reports neural activity associated with false memories as 
a function of the target/lure perceptual relatedness, including activity in right mPFC (BA 10) 
and bilateral MTG (BA 21).1 In order to confirm that the regions identified in the parametric 
analysis were uniquely associated with false alarm activity and not due to relatedness more 
generally, we explicitly masked the false memory analysis with a similar parametric analysis 
on correction rejections (exclusive masking was carried out using a liberal uncorrected 
threshold of p < 0.05 for the mask).2 No region exhibited overlap between the two analyses, 
confirming that the foregoing activity is specific to false memories.
mPFC connectivity: Connectivity analyses revealed a significant correlation between 
mPFC and left, but not right, middle temporal gyrus with respect to neural recruitment 
supporting the above-mentioned perceptually related false alarms.
ROI results: Our a priori hypotheses predicted modulation of false alarms as a function 
of relatedness in PFC and lateral temporal cortex, as well as FFA and MTL. While our 
whole brain results exhibited modulation of activity in PFC and lateral temporal cortices, 
we did not observe the predicted increases in FFA or MTL. In order to fully interrogate 
the response pattern within these regions, we used an ROI approach to take a closer look 
at activation within each region. Using a liberal threshold of p < .05 within each ROI, 
neither the FFA nor MTL exhibited any effect of relatedness supporting false memories. 
Additionally, we investigated whether activation in each region might be better characterized 
by any non-parametric response pattern by creating a non-parametric model consisting of 
hits, misses, false alarms and correct rejections where false alarm and correct rejection 
regressors were further broken down by the relatedness condition (i.e., 70:30; 50:50; 30:70; 
0:100). This model allowed us to explore, in greater detail, the pattern of activity within the 
FFA and MTL. We obtained and plotted the mean activity within the functionally defined 
FFA ROI and the anatomically defined MTL ROI, for each trial type of interest within false 
alarms. A repeated measure ANOVA revealed no significant differences amongst false alarm 
regressors in any ROI. Hence, activity within both the FFA and MTL does not appear to be 
modulated by the systematic degree of relatedness in false alarms (see Supplementary Fig. 
1).
Discussion
Expanding upon previous paradigms used to study false memories of perceptually related 
items, the current study investigated the neural circuitry that supported false memory 
retrieval as a function of the perceptual relatedness between the lures and the targets. 
Similar to previous studies, while true memories elicited greater activity in right PHG and 
1An identical analysis conducted on the morphed faces alone resulted in a similar pattern of activation as reported above with small 
reductions in cluster extent and the absence of right MTG activity.
2A liberal threshold for an exclusive mask is more conservative in excluding regions from the masked SPM. The procedure of 
exclusively masking main effects by their interaction is formally equivalent to the original definition of a “cognitive conjunction” 
(Price and Friston, 1997).
Turney and Dennis
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

early visual cortex (BA 18) bilaterally, false memories elicited increased activity in right 
superior frontal gyrus and left STG. Unique to the current study, analyses investigated 
the relationship between neural activity supporting false memories as a function of the 
perceptual overlap between lures and targets. With regard to the manipulation of lure 
relatedness, our behavioral finding indicated that, as perceptual relatedness to the target 
increased, false alarm rates also linearly increased. Imaging results converged with our 
behavioral findings, identifying several regions that exhibited increased false memory 
activation as a function of relatedness, including right mPFC (BA 10) and bilateral middle 
temporal gyri (BA 21). Together, our findings further clarify the roles of monitoring and 
perceptual processes in false memories. Each finding is discussed further, below.
Overall differences in true and false retrieval
Similar to previous studies examining differences between true and false memories using 
perceptually related stimuli, true compared to false memories, were supported by increased 
activity in bilateral early visual cortices (BA 18) and MTL (right PHG) (see Fig. 2A)). In 
line with the sensory reactivation hypothesis, activity within early visual cortex has been 
proposed to reflect episodic reinstatement of the perceptual representations supporting the 
encoding episode (Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006; Kahn et al., 2004; Okado and Stark, 2003; 
Slotnick and Schacter, 2004, 2006). Similarly, activity within the MTL, and specifically 
within the PHG, has also been shown to reflect accurate retrieval of item-specific details 
of the encoding episode (e.g., Cabeza et al., 2001; Dennis et al., 2012; Kim and Cabeza, 
2007). Together, the observed activity within these regions supports previous work showing 
that true recognition is supported by the recapitulation and reconstruction of item-specific 
details of the encoding event (e.g., Slotnick and Schacter, 2004; Wheeler and Buckner, 2004; 
Yonelinas et al., 2005).
With respect to false retrieval, results are consistent with our predictions that false memories 
stemming from perceptual overlap between targets and lures require greater evaluation and 
monitoring processes than true memories, which are accompanied by the recapitulation of 
sensory details of the encoding episode. Specifically, false compared to true retrieval was 
accompanied by increased activity in right superior frontal gyrus and left STG (see Fig. 
2B)). Increased frontal activity for false memories has been found across numerous studies 
(for review, see Dennis et al. (2015) and Kurkela and Dennis (2016)) and interpreted as 
reflecting a reliance on frontally mediated retrieval processes, including monitoring and 
evaluation (e.g., Cabeza et al., 2001; Garoff-Eaton et al., 2007; Schacter et al., 1997; 
Slotnick and Schacter, 2004; Yonelinas et al., 2005). Also in line with our predictions, false 
compared to true retrieval exhibited activation in the left STG, which has been associated 
with semantic processing and retrieval of semantic gist (Noppeney et al., 2007; Price, 2000; 
Simons et al., 2005; Wise and Price, 2006). Taken together, activation in the STG observed 
in the current study supports the notion that lateral temporal regions support false memories 
through the involvement of semantic gist, along with perceptual relatedness between lures 
and targets.
Interestingly, while the role of the lateral temporal cortex has previously been observed in 
studies that utilize a strong semantic/ categorical component to the study of false memories, 
Turney and Dennis
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the current study found that activity in this region was associated with false memory within 
a single category of stimuli, faces. As such, the results represent an interesting extension of 
previous work suggesting that (1) this region may represent gist processing more generally 
and/or (2) false memories for faces involves semantic processing. With respect to the latter 
interpretation, it may be the case that false retrieval for faces relies in part on semantic 
labeling of a given face, such as “the girl with the freckles”. Such a label may have been 
generated at encoding and reactivated at retrieval when individuals are presented with the 
related lure that matches the label to any extent. This is especially relevant to the retrieval of 
these false memories, as they are not accompanied by the recapitulation of sensory details. 
Thus, individuals are likely using gist and not verbatim traces in their memory evaluation.
Modulation of activity for false memories as a function of relatedness
One of the main goals of the current study was to examine the role of systematic increases 
in perceptual relatedness in false memories on both behavioral rates of false memories and 
neural recruitment supporting false memories. Behaviorally, we found that the rate of false 
memories was dependent on the systematic degree of target/lure similarity. Specifically, 
there was a significant linear effect in the false memory rate and reaction times as a function 
of increasing perceptual relatedness between lures and targets. As noted in the results, the 
only pairwise comparison that failed to reach significance was the false alarm rate difference 
between 30:70 and 50:50 lures. Given this significant linear trend we speculate that this 
single insignificant pairwise comparison may reflect a lack of power (especially as there is a 
numerical increase in false memories from 30:70 to 50:50). This finding is largely consistent 
with previous studies that find both semantic and perceptual similarity to be a key factor 
in eliciting false memories (e.g., Deese, 1959; Gallo and Roediger, 2003; Garoff-Eaton et 
al., 2007; Koutstaal and Schacter, 1997; McEvoy et al., 1999; Roediger and Mcdermott, 
1995). Moreover, we extend previous research to show that discrete increases in perceptual 
relatedness between lures and targets also increased false memories. In other words, the 
perceptual gist of the lure is a strong factor in predicting whether the lure will be mistakenly 
identified as ‘old’ at test.
With respect to the neural results, as predicted, we observed that as the similarity between 
the related lure and the target increased, activity within bilateral MTG and right mPFC also 
increased (see Fig. 3). Extending our interpretation of lateral temporal activation supporting 
overall false memories to perceptually related lures (see above), the parametric results 
suggest a greater reliance on general gist processing and/or semantic gist as perceptual 
similarity between targets and lures increased. To this end results are consistent with the 
Fuzzy Trace Theory of memory, which posits that false recognition is mediated by a strong 
sense of familiarity and often predicated on retrieval of the gist traces (Deese, 1959; Reyna 
and Brainerd, 1995; for review, see Reyna and Brainerd (2011)). The current analysis 
suggests an increased contribution of gist traces in support of false memories, as a function 
of the strength of the gist trace (see also Gutchess and Schacter (2012)). This also supports 
previous false memories studies that conclude that the reliance on familiarity and relatedness 
traces are fundamental to supporting false memories (Brainerd and Reyna, 2002; Dennis et 
al., 2008; Dennis et al., 2008b; Koutstaal and Schacter, 1997).
Turney and Dennis
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Interestingly, the lateral temporal activation identified in the parametric analysis differed 
from that identified in the foregoing analysis that collapsed across levels of relatedness for 
false memories. Specifically, the parametric analysis yielded bilateral activation in lateral 
temporal regions that were more superior and posterior to that observed in the collapsed 
relatedness false memories analysis. Investigations across previous studies revealed that 
there has been little consistency in the foci of activity within the lateral temporal cortices 
(e.g., Dennis et al., 2014,, 2014; Duarte et al., 2010; Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006). A closer 
investigation of false memory activation in lateral temporal cortex found in previous studies 
that collapsed across degrees of relatedness across both semantic and perceptual stimuli 
(Dennis et al., 2014) showed relative consistency in spatial overlap (with respect to the z 
dimension: −59, −31, 8 and 45, −9, 17) with the current study’s collapsed false memory 
relatedness contrast ( −62, −32, 19). The peak of activity in the parametric analysis from 
the current study (−53, −25, −8) on the other hand, was relatively aligned with a false 
memory cluster from a study in which lures were re-combinations of encoding pairs (Dennis 
et al. (2008): −38, −26, −8; Dennis et al. (2014): −48, −1, −6), and thus incurred a higher 
amount of perceptual overlap between studied items and lures than is encountered in more 
traditional false memory studies. Thus, the difference in location within the lateral temporal 
cortex may reflect or be dependent upon the amount of perceptual overlap or gist incurred 
across lure stimuli.
As predicted, the right mPFC also showed increased activation with respect to target/lure 
similarity. Previous studies have related activity within this region to task difficulty in 
decision-making (e.g., Volz et al., 2005; Zysset et al., 2006). False memory studies have 
also consistently seen activity in mPFC, associating it with greater reliance on evaluation 
and monitoring processes necessary when making memory decisions related to critical lures 
(Atkins and Reuter-Lorenz, 2011; Dennis et al., 2014, 2012; Garoff-Eaton et al., 2007; 
Iidaka et al., 2012; von Zerssen et al., 2001). Furthermore, results of the connectivity 
analysis showed that activity in the right mPFC was correlated with activity in the left MTG 
region that was also found active in the parametric analysis. As such, results suggest that 
increased monitoring and evaluation processes are necessary to deal with increases in gist 
activity within the context of false memories.
This interpretation of the data is consistent with previous false memory studies in which 
activity in mPFC, has been attributed to increased monitoring (Garoff-Eaton et al., 2006; 
Okado and Stark, 2003; Slotnick and Schacter, 2004), difficulty of evaluating a response 
decision (Maril et al., 2001), as well as greater mnemonic processing of the related lures 
(Iidaka et al., 2012; Okado and Stark, 2003; von Zerssen et al., 2001). Other studies 
examining conflict between competing representations (Barch et al., 2001; van Veen and 
Carter, 2002) and competing mnemonic representations (Kuhl et al., 2007) also attribute 
increased mPFC activity to the handling of such increasing cognitive demands. Our results 
extend this interpretation of mPFC activity within false memories by showing that mPFC 
activity supporting false memories is modulated by the systematic degree of relatedness 
between lures and targets. Connectivity results also support the notion that as similarity 
between target and lure items increased, connectivity between mPFC and left lateral 
temporal cortex increased, suggesting an increased need for evaluation and monitoring as 
gist-activity increased. Furthermore, results suggest an increase in conflict and difficulty 
Turney and Dennis
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in decision-making as the similarity between lures and targets increased. This was also 
supported by our behavioral data, showing increases in reaction time for lures.
One could speculate that the foregoing findings reflect activity associated with relatedness 
more generally, and are not specific to false memory activity. In order to explore this 
hypothesis, we also examined activity that parametrically modulated correct rejections as 
relatedness to targets increased. At the corrected threshold used in the current study, results 
revealed no significant activity. As a second step, we masked the false memory activity 
with the correct rejection activity using an exclusive mask of p < .05 uncorrected (note 
that while p < .05 is liberal with respect to inclusion of activation, as an exclusive mask, 
this actually represents a relatively conservative exclusion threshold). No region exhibited 
overlap between the two analyses. Thus, we concluded that none of the regions evident 
in the false memory parametric contrast resulted from general increases in relatedness, but 
instead reflected increases in activity that are specific to false memories.
Though contrary to our predictions, the lack of parametric modulation in FFA and MTL 
should be considered, as these regions play vital roles in the retrieval of faces and item-
specific details, respectively. The FFA is known to be involved in the recognition of familiar 
faces (Haxby et al., 2000). Nevertheless, within the context of false memories, this region 
does not appear to modulate systematic increases in relatedness. Furthermore, this FFA 
ROI was evident for true greater than false memories and not for false greater than true 
memories. Taken together, this can be interpreted as the FFA having preference for true old 
faces. In this case, it would appear that the lure face, even if very related to the target face, 
was not sufficient to elicit activity from the FFA region. This provides further support for the 
specific involvement of the FFA in retrieving item-specific details, supporting true, not false 
memories.
As for MTL activity, this region has been implicated as a region that tracks relatedness 
to support true memories (Cabeza et al., 2001; Dennis et al., 2012, 2008b; Giovanello 
et al., 2009; Kahn et al., 2004; Kensinger and Schacter, 2006; Kim and Cabeza, 2007b; 
Paz-Alonso et al., 2008). We originally hypothesized that the inconsistency of MTL findings 
for false memories may have been due to the lack of a systematic measure of the relatedness 
of lures used across studies. Yet, even in our study, MTL still did not appear to modulate 
activity of false memories to perceptually related lures. This could be interpreted similarly 
to that of the visual (FFA) activity above in showing that, though the MTL may be involved 
in the reconstruction and retrieval of sensory details, in the case of false memories, unless 
the details are truly old, they are not tracked by this region. In saying so, it is also possible 
that only parts of the MTL track relatedness (i.e., PHG, anterior vs. posterior parts of the 
hippocampus, etc.). Future studies should examine the role of sub-regions within the MTL 
or utilize multivariate pattern analyses as it can provide greater specificity in elucidating the 
involvement of MTL sub-regions in false memory retrieval.
Limitations and future directions
The present study was able to replicate previous findings of distinct activity of true and 
false memories, as well as provide novel insight into the neural basis of false memories 
that arise due to perceptual overlap between lure and target stimuli. Nevertheless, we note 
Turney and Dennis
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

limitations to our approach that should be taken into consideration. First, because we wanted 
to investigate false memories as a function of perceptual relatedness to the target image, the 
current design necessitated using a limited number of lure trials at each relatedness level in 
order to have a balance between total targets and total lures. Thus, this resulted in a limited 
numbered of false memories at each relatedness level. While this was anticipated and was 
included as a planned parametric analysis, it limited our ability to assess neural activity at 
each level of relatedness separately.
Future studies may attempt to adjust the task design to better account for this issue. 
Increasing the overall number of lure trials will also allow for an examination of neural 
mechanisms underlying systematic differences in confidence, which we were unable to 
investigate here, due to insufficient trial counts. Second, while we discuss the results in 
terms of perceptual relatedness in false memories, we recognize that replication across 
varied stimuli-types beyond faces (e.g., objects) is necessary to extend these results to the 
field more generally. Third, we identified two findings contrary to our predictions (e.g., the 
lack of early visual cortex and MTL activity associated with our false memory parametric 
analysis). The null results reported in the MTL and FFA ROIs may be due to the collapsing 
of confidence across memories. Increasing the number of lure trials overall in future studies, 
may allow for further examination of the involvement of these regions isolating the effect of 
relatedness on high confidence false memories.
Conclusion
The current study aimed to elucidate the cognitive and neural mechanisms underlying both 
true and false retrieval, as well as the influence of the perceptual overlap between targets 
and lures on false retrieval. Behaviorally, our results showed as the perceptual similarity 
between a lure and a studied face increased, so too did the false alarm rate and reaction time 
to lures. As such, results provide evidence for the notion that false memories result, in part, 
due to the amount of perceptual overlap between lures and studied items. With respect to 
the neuroimaging results, our results converge with previous studies showing distinct neural 
activity supporting true and false memories. Specifically, supporting previous false memory 
studies, true compared to false memories showed increased activity in bilateral early visual 
cortex (BA 18), reflecting the recapitulation of item-specific details of the encoding event 
and in right PHG, reflecting accurate reconstruction of item-specific details. On the other 
hand, false greater than true memories elicited increased activity in the right superior frontal 
gyrus and the left STG, suggestive of a need for greater monitoring and increased reliance 
on gist traces associated with the related lure.
Unique to our study, we examined the role of systematic increases in perceptual relatedness 
between lures and targets on the neural recruitment supporting false memories. Extending 
results from prior studies, the current findings highlight the role of the mPFC, and bilateral 
MTG in modulating false memories as a function of relatedness. Additionally, connectivity 
analyses showed a significant relationship between activity in mPFC and left MTG. Taken 
together, results indicate an increased need for monitoring as gist increased when making 
false memories. Overall, these results provide insight into the processes underlying false 
Turney and Dennis
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

memories and further enhance our understanding of the role perceptual similarity plays in 
supporting false memories.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Penn State Social, Life, & Engineering Sciences Imaging Center (SLEIC), 3T MRI 
Facility. We also thank members from the CAN Lab, including Christina Webb, John Huhn, and Kyle Kurkela, 
for helpful comments throughout the project and during the writing process. This work was supported by a 
National Science Foundation Grant [BCS1025709] awarded to NAD and was conducted while N.A.D. was an 
AFAR Research Grant recipient from the American Federation for Aging Research, as well as a Graduate Research 
Fellowship from the National Science Foundation awarded to I.C.T [.DGE1255832].
References
Arditi A., 2005. Improving the design of the letter contrast sensitivity test. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci 
46 (6), 2225–2229. 10.1167/iovs.04-1198. [PubMed: 15914645] 
Atkins AS, Reuter-Lorenz PA, 2011. Neural mechanisms of semantic interference and false 
recognition in short-term memory. Neuroimage 56 (3), 1726–1734. [PubMed: 21349335] 
Avidan G, Hasson U, Malach R, Behrmann M, 2005. Detailed exploration of face-related processing 
in congenital prosopagnosia: 2. Functional neuroimaging findings. J. Cogn. Neurosci 17 (7), 1150–
1167. [PubMed: 16102242] 
Barch DM, Carter CS, Braver TS, Sabb FW, MacDonald A 3rd, Noll DC, Cohen JD, 2001. Selective 
deficits in prefrontal cortex function in medication-naive patients with schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. 
Psychiatry 58 (3), 280–288. [PubMed: 11231835] 
Bowman CR, Dennis NA, 2015. The neural correlates of correctly rejecting lures during 
memory retrieval: the role of item relatedness. Exp. Brain Res 233 (6), 1963–1975. 10.1007/
s00221-015-4268-y. [PubMed: 25862563] 
Bowman CR, Dennis NA, 2016. The neural basis of recollection rejection: increases in hippocampal-
prefrontal connectivity in the absence of a shared recall-to-reject and target recollection network. J. 
Cogn. Neurosci 28 (8), 1194–1209. 10.1162/jocn_a_00961. [PubMed: 27054401] 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, 1990. Gist is the gist: the fuzzy-trace theory and new intuitionism. Dev. Rev 
10, 3–47.
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, 2002. Fuzzy-trace theory and false memory. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci 11, 164–
169.
Brown MW, Aggleton JP, 2001. Recognition memory: what are the roles of the perirhinal cortex and 
hippocampus? Nat. Rev. Neurosci 2 (1), 51–61. [PubMed: 11253359] 
Cabeza R, Rao SM, Wagner AD, Mayer AR, Schacter DL, 2001. Can medial temporal lobe regions 
distinguish true from false? An event-related functional MRI study of veridical and illusory 
recognition memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 98 (8), 4805–4810. [PubMed: 11287664] 
Collins DL, Zijdenbos A, Kollokian V, Sled JG, Kabani NJ, Holmes CJ, Evans AC, 1998. Design and 
construction of a realistic digital brain phantom. IEEE Trans. Med. Imag 17 (3), 463–468.
Cox RW, Hyde JS, 1997. Software tools for analysis and visualization of fMRI data. Nmr Biomed. 10 
(4–5), 171–178, doi: 〈〉. [PubMed: 9430344] 
Daselaar SM, Fleck MS, Prince SE, Cabeza R, 2006. The medial temporal lobe distinguishes old from 
new independently of consciousness. J. Neurosci 26 (21), 5835–5839. [PubMed: 16723542] 
Deese J., 1959. On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. J. 
Exp. Psychol 58 (1), 17–22. [PubMed: 13664879] 
Dennis NA, Kim H, Cabeza R, 2008b. Age-related differences in brain activity during true and false 
memory retrieval. J. Cogn. Neurosci 20 (8), 1390–1402. [PubMed: 18303982] 
Turney and Dennis
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Dennis NA, Bowman CR, Vandekar SN, 2012. True and phantom recollection: an fMRI investigation 
of similar and distinct neural correlates and connectivity. Neuroimage 59 (3), 2982–2993. 
[PubMed: 22001165] 
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, Peterson KP, 2014. Age-related differences in the neural correlates 
mediating false recollection. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 395–407. [PubMed: 24094578] 
Dennis NA, Johnson CE, Peterson KP, 2014. Neural correlates underlying true and false associative 
memories. Brain Cogn. 88, 65–72. [PubMed: 24859815] 
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, Turney IC, 2015. Functional neuroimaging of false memories. In: Addis 
DR, Barense M, Duarte A (Eds.), The Wiley Handbook on the Cognitive Neuroscience of 
Memory. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK.
Dennis NA, Hayes SM, Prince SE, Huettel SA, Madden DJ, Cabeza R, 2008. Effects of aging on the 
neural correlates of successful item and source memory encoding. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. 
Cogn 34 (4), 791–808. [PubMed: 18605869] 
Duarte A, Graham KS, Henson RN, 2010. Age-related changes in neural activity associated with 
familiarity, recollection and false recognition. Neurobiol. Aging 31 (10), 1814–1830. [PubMed: 
19004526] 
Gallo DA, Roediger HL 3rd, 2003. The effects of associations and aging on illusory recollection. 
Mem. Cogn 31 (7), 1036–1044.
Garoff-Eaton RJ, Slotnick SD, Schacter DL, 2006. Not all false memories are created equal: the neural 
basis of false recognition. Cereb. Cortex 16 (11), 1645–1652. [PubMed: 16400158] 
Garoff-Eaton RJ, Kensinger EA, Schacter DL, 2007. The neural correlates of conceptual and 
perceptual false recognition. Learn. Mem 14 (10), 684–692. [PubMed: 17911372] 
Giovanello KS, Kensinger EA, Wong AT, Schacter DL, 2009. Age-related neural changes during 
memory conjunction errors. J. Cogn. Neurosci 22 (7), 1348–1361.
Glanzer M, Adams JK, 1985. The mirror effect in recognition memory. Mem. Cogn 13 (1), 8–20. 
10.3758/Bf03198438.
Gutchess AH, Schacter DL, 2012. The neural correlates of gist-based true and false recognition. 
Neuroimage 59 (4), 3418–3426. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.078. [PubMed: 22155331] 
Hasson U, Nir Y, Levy I, Fuhrmann G, Malach R, 2004. Intersubject synchronization of cortical 
activity during natural vision. Science 303 (5664), 1634–1640. [PubMed: 15016991] 
Haxby JV, Hoffman EA, Gobbini MI, 2000. The distributed human neural system for face perception. 
Trends Cogn. Sci 4 (6), 223–233. [PubMed: 10827445] 
Hockley WE, 2008. The effects of environmental context on recognition memory and claims 
of remembering. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn 34 (6), 1412–1429. 10.1037/a0013016. 
[PubMed: 18980405] 
Hofer A, Siedentopf CM, Ischebeck A, Rettenbacher MA, Verius M, Golaszewski SM, Fleischhacker 
WW, 2007. Neural substrates for episodic encoding and recognition of unfamiliar faces. Brain 
Cogn. 63 (2), 174–181. 10.1016/j.bandc.2006.11.005. [PubMed: 17207899] 
Hoffman EA, Haxby JV, 2000. Distinct representations of eye gaze and identity in the distributed 
human neural system for face perception. Nat. Neurosci 3 (1), 80–84. [PubMed: 10607399] 
Iidaka T, Harada T, Kawaguchi J, Sadato N, 2012. Neuroanatomical substrates involved in true and 
false memories for face. Neuroimage 62 (1), 167–176. [PubMed: 22575420] 
Kahn I, Davachi L, Wagner AD, 2004. Functional-neuroanatomic correlates of recollection: 
implications for models of recognition memory. J. Neurosci 24 (17), 4172–4180. [PubMed: 
15115812] 
Kanwisher N, Yovel G, 2006. The fusiform face area: a cortical region specialized for the perception 
of faces. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci 361 (1476), 2109–2128. 10.1098/rstb.2006.1934. 
[PubMed: 17118927] 
Kensinger EA, Schacter DL, 2006. Amygdala activity is associated with the successful encoding of 
item, but not source, information for positive and negative stimuli. J. Neurosci 26 (9), 2564–2570. 
[PubMed: 16510734] 
Kim HK, Cabeza R, 2007. Differential contributions of prefrontal, medial temporal, and sensory-
perceptual regions to true and false memory formation. Cereb. Cortex 17, 2143–2150. [PubMed: 
17110592] 
Turney and Dennis
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Kim HK, Cabeza R, 2007b. Trusting our memories: dissociating the neural correlates of confidence in 
veridical and illusory memories. J. Neurosci 27, 12190–12197. [PubMed: 17989285] 
Kirchhoff BA, Wagner AD, Maril A, Stern CE, 2000. Prefrontal-temporal circuitry for episodic 
encoding and subsequent memory. J. Neurosci 20 (16), 6173–6180. [PubMed: 10934267] 
Koutstaal W, Schacter DL, 1997. Gist-based false recognition of pictures in older and younger adults. 
J. Mem. Lang 37, 555–583.
Kubota Y, Toichi M, Shimizu M, Mason RA, Findling RL, Yamamoto K, Calabrese JR, 2006. 
Prefrontal hemodynamic activity predicts false memory – a near-infrared spectroscopy study. 
Neuroimage 31 (4), 1783–1789. [PubMed: 16545964] 
Kuhl BA, Dudukovic NM, Kahn I, Wagner AD, 2007. Decreased demands on cognitive control reveal 
the neural processing benefits of forgetting. Nat. Neurosci 10 (7), 908–914. 10.1038/nn1918. 
[PubMed: 17558403] 
Kumaran D, Maguire EA, 2009. Novelty signals: a window into hippocampal information processing. 
Trends Cogn. Sci 13 (2), 47–54. [PubMed: 19135404] 
Kurkela KA, Dennis NA, 2016. Event-related fMRI studies of false memory: an 
activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia 81, 149–167. 10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2015.12.006. [PubMed: 26683385] 
Lancaster JL, Woldorff MG, Parsons LM, Liotti M, Freitas CS, Rainey L, Fox PT, 2000. Automated 
Talairach atlas labels for functional brain mapping. Human Brain Mapp. 10 (3), 120–131.
Maldjian JA, Laurienti PJ, Kraft RA, Burdette JH, 2003. An automated method for neuroanatomic 
and cytoarchitectonic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets. Neuroimage 19 (3), 1233–1239. 
[PubMed: 12880848] 
Marche TA, Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, 2010. Distinguishing true from false memories in forensic 
contexts: can phenomenology tell us what is real. Appl. Cogn. Psychol 24 (8), 1168–1182.
Maril A, Wagner AD, Schacter DL, 2001. On the tip of the tongue. An event-related fMRI study of 
semantic retrieval failure and cognitive conflict. Neuron 31 (4), 653–660. [PubMed: 11545723] 
Martinez AM, Benavente R, 1998. The AR face database. CVC Tech. Rep, 24.
Mather M, Henkel LA, Johnson MK, 1997. Evaluating characteristics of false memories: remember/
know judgments and memory characteristics questionnaire compared. Mem. Cogn 25 (6), 826–
837.
McEvoy CL, Nelson DL, Komatsu T, 1999. What is the connection between true and false memories? 
The differential roles of interitem associations in recall and recognition. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. 
Mem. Cogn 25 (5), 1177–1194. [PubMed: 10505342] 
McLaren DG, Ries ML, Xu G, Johnson SC, 2012. A generalized form of contextdependent 
psychophysiological interactions (gPPI): a comparison to standard approaches. Neuroimage 61 
(4), 1277–1286. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.068. [PubMed: 22484411] 
Noppeney U, Patterson K, Tyler LK, Moss H, Stamatakis EA, Bright P, Price CJ, 2007. Temporal lobe 
lesions and semantic impairment: a comparison of herpes simplex virus encephalitis and semantic 
dementia. Brain 130 (Pt 4), 1138–1147. [PubMed: 17251241] 
Norman KA, Schacter DL, 1997. False recognition in younger and older adults: exploring the 
characteristics of illusory memories. Mem. Cognit 25 (6), 838–848.
Nosofsky RM, Little DR, Donkin C, Fific M, 2011. Short-term memory scanning viewed as exemplar-
based categorization. Psychol. Rev 118 (2), 280–315. 10.1037/a0022494. [PubMed: 21355662] 
Okado Y, Stark C, 2003. Neural processing associated with true and false memory retrieval. Cogn. 
Affect. Behav. Neurosci 3 (4), 323–334. [PubMed: 15040552] 
Paz-Alonso PM, Ghetti S, Donohue SE, Goodman GS, Bunge SA, 2008. Neurodevelopmental 
correlates of true and false recognition. Cereb. Cortex 18 (9), 2208–2216. [PubMed: 18203693] 
Phillips J, Wechsler H, Huang J, Rauss J, 1998. The FERET database and evaluation procedure for 
face-recognition algorithms. Image Vis. Comput 16 (5), 295–306.
Price CJ, 2000. The anatomy of language: contributions from functional neuroimaging. J. Anat 197 (Pt 
3), 335–359. [PubMed: 11117622] 
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ, 1995. Fuzzy-trace theory – an interim synthesis. Learn. Individ. Differ 7 (1), 
1–75.
Turney and Dennis
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ, 2011. Dual processes in decision making and developmental neuroscience: a 
fuzzy-trace model. Dev. Rev 31 (2–3), 180–206. 10.1016/j.dr.2011.07.004. [PubMed: 22096268] 
Roediger HL 3rd, Mcdermott KB, 1995. Creating false memories – remembering words not presented 
in lists. J. Exp. Psychol.: Learn. Mem. Cognit 21 (4), 803–814.
Schacter DL, Koutstaal W, Johnson MK, Gross MS, Angell KE, 1997. False recollection induced 
by photographs: a comparison of older and younger adults. Psychol. Aging 12 (2), 203–215. 
[PubMed: 9189980] 
Schacter DL, Reiman E, Curran T, Yun LS, Bandy D, McDermott KB, Roediger HL 3rd, 1996. 
Neuroanatomical correlates of veridical and illusory recognition memory: evidence from positron 
emission tomography. Neuron 17 (2), 267–274. [PubMed: 8780650] 
Scherf KS, Luna B, Minshew N, Behrmann M, 2010. Location, location, location: alterations in the 
functional topography of face-but not object- or place-related cortex in adolescents with autism. 
Front. Hum. Neurosci 4, 26. [PubMed: 20631857] 
Simons JS, Verfaellie M, Hodges JR, Lee AC, Graham KS, Koutstaal W, Budson AE, 2005. 
Failing to get the gist: reduced false recognition of semantic associates in semantic dementia. 
Neuropsychology 19 (3), 353–361. [PubMed: 15910121] 
Slotnick SD, Schacter DL, 2004. A sensory signature that distinguishes true from false memories. Nat. 
Neurosci 7 (6), 664–672. [PubMed: 15156146] 
Slotnick SD, Schacter DL, 2006. The nature of memory related activity in early visual areas. 
Neuropsychologia 44 (14), 2874–2886. [PubMed: 16901520] 
Stark CE, Okado Y, Loftus EF, 2010. Imaging the reconstruction of true and false memories using 
sensory reactivation and the misinformation paradigms. Learn. Mem 17 (10), 485–488. [PubMed: 
20861170] 
Tulving E, Markowitsch HJ, Craik FE, Habib R, Houle S, 1996. Novelty and familiarity activations in 
PET studies of memory encoding and retrieval. Cereb. Cortex 6 (1), 71–79. [PubMed: 8670640] 
Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Landeau B, Papathanassiou D, Crivello F, Etard O, Delcroix N, Joliot M, 2002. 
Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation 
of the MNI MRI single-subject brain. Neuroimage 15 (1), 273–289. [PubMed: 11771995] 
Vaidya CJ, Zhao M, Desmond JE, Gabrieli JD, 2002. Evidence for cortical encoding specificity in 
episodic memory: memory-induced re-activation of picture processing areas. Neuropsychologia 40 
(12), 2136–2143. [PubMed: 12208009] 
van Veen V, Carter CS, 2002. The timing of action-monitoring processes in the anterior cingulate 
cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci 14 (4), 593–602. [PubMed: 12126500] 
Volz KG, Schubotz RI, von Cramon DY, 2005. Variants of uncertainty in decision-making and their 
neural correlates. Brain Res. Bull 67 (5), 403–412. 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.06.011. [PubMed: 
16216687] 
von Zerssen GC, Mecklinger A, Opitz B, von Cramon DY, 2001. Conscious recollection and 
illusory recognition: an event-related fMRI study. Eur. J. Neurosci 13 (11), 2148–2156. [PubMed: 
11422456] 
Wheeler ME, Buckner RL, 2004. Functional-anatomic correlates of remembering and knowing. 
Neuroimage 21 (4), 1337–1349. [PubMed: 15050559] 
Wheeler ME, Petersen SE, Buckner RL, 2000. Memory’s echo: vivid remembering reactivates 
sensory-specific cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 (20), 11125–11129. [PubMed: 11005879] 
Wise RJS, Price CJ, 2006. Functional imaging of language. In: Cabeza R, Kingstone A (Eds.), 
Handbook of Functional Neuroimaging of Cognition, 2nd ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 
191–228.
Yonelinas AP, Otten LJ, Shaw KN, Rugg MD, 2005. Separating the brain regions involved in 
recollection and familiarity in recognition memory. J. Neurosci 25 (11), 3002–3008. [PubMed: 
15772360] 
Zysset S, Wendt CS, Volz KG, Neumann J, Huber O, von Cramon DY, 2006. The neural 
implementation of multi-attribute decision making: a parametric fMRI study with human subjects. 
Neuroimage 31 (3), 1380–1388. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.017. [PubMed: 16513368] 
Turney and Dennis
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1. 
Results revealed a main effect of relatedness in which the rate of false alarms increased 
linearly, as target/lure relatedness increased. FA=False Alarms.
Turney and Dennis
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 2. 
A) Regions showing greater activity for true compared to false retrieval, including early 
and late visual cortices (bilaterally) and right parahippocampal gyrus. B) Regions showing 
greater activity for false compared to true retrieval, including left superior temporal gyrus 
and medial prefrontal cortex.
Turney and Dennis
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 3. 
Regions showing parametric increase in false memory activity as function of the similarity 
between the lure and target item, including bilateral middle temporal gyrus and medial 
prefrontal cortex.
Turney and Dennis
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Turney and Dennis
Page 24
Table 1
Study stimuli and behavioral results.
% of Parent Faces
(100:0)
(70:30)
(50:50)
(30:70)
(0:100)
Trial Type
Target
Morphed Lure
Morphed Lure
Morphed Lure
Unmorphed Lure
Percentage Old
0.74 (0.14)
0.56 (0.14)
.30 (.13)
.25 (.15)
.10 (.10)
Response Times (ms)
 Hits
4151.54 (1041.21)
-
-
-
-
 Misses
3970.19 (646.08)
-
-
-
-
 False Alarms
-
3871.06 (877.72)
3436.06 (1076.64)
3299.05 (1557.56)
2120 (1200)
 Correct Rejections
-
4243.31 (966.05)
3995.13 (852.83)
4007.69 (660.72)
3740.59 (1163.21)
This table shows the study stimuli and behavioral results. Presented is an exemplar of a target face and its corresponding lure faces, given the various degrees of morphing in the current study. Note, at 
retrieval, participants only saw one of the faces from each category, i.e.. participants saw either the target face or one of the lures at retrieval. Below each exemplar face are indices of behavioral performance 
across each category. All responses are collapsed across confidence ratings and the inverse of response rates (percentage old) for hits and false alarms corresponds to the miss and correct rejection rates, 
respectively.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Turney and Dennis
Page 25
Table 2
True and false retrieval.
BA
H
Coordinates (T&T)
t
mm3
X
Y
Z
True > false retrieval
Parahippocampal Gyrus 
–
R
21
−4
−9
5.75
837
Inferior Occipital Gyrus
18
R
30
−85
3
5.32
3861
Lingual Cyrus
17/18
L
−21
−89
−7
4.42
10341
False > true retrieval
Superior Frontal Gyrus 
10
R
33
57
4
4.63
3564
Superior Temporal Gyrus 
42
L
−62
−32
19
3.86
783
The table reports regions activated for true compared to false retrieval and false compared to true retrieval. BA=Brodmann’s Area; H=Hemisphere; L=Left; M=Medial; R=Right; t=statistical t-value; 
T&T=Talairach and Tournoux coordinates. Italics represent a priori ROIs.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Turney and Dennis
Page 26
Table 3
False alarm parametric modulation.
BA
H
Coordinates (T&T)
t
mm3
X
Y
Z
Medial Prefrontal Cortex (mPFC)
10
R
6
52
7
6.03
6318
Middle Temporal Gyrus 
21
L
−53
−25
−8
4.75
1539
Middle Temporal Gyrus 
21
R
53
−36
−7
4.21
837
The table reports regions activated for false memory as a function of the similarity between the lure and target item. BA=Brodmann's Area; H=Hemisphere; L=Left; M=Mediai; R=Right; t=statistical 
t-value; T&T=Talairach and Tournoux coordinates.Italics represent a priori ROIs.