False Memories, False Preferences: Flexible Retrieval 
Mechanisms Supporting Successful Inference Bias Novel 
Decisions
Alexis C. Carpenter and Daniel L. Schacter
Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science, Harvard University
Abstract
Prior research suggests that episodic memory can guide value-based decisions when single 
episodes are encoded in relation to the specific reward-context in which they were experienced. 
The current experiments examine the role that a flexible recombination-related retrieval 
mechanism that allows one to link together distinct events plays in the misattribution of specific 
reward-contexts across distinct episodes. To determine whether the same recombination-related 
retrieval mechanism supports both successful inference and transfer of reward-context across 
episodes, we developed a modified version of an associative inference paradigm in which 
participants encoded overlapping associations (AB, BC) that could later be linked to support 
inferential retrieval (AC), where one element (‘A’) was tied to reward. Our key experimental 
manipulation concerned whether value memory (Experiments 1 and 2) or decision bias tests 
(Experiment 3) were probed before or after the associative inference test, thereby allowing us to 
assess whether false value transfer and decision bias scores increased after as compared to before 
successful versus unsuccessful inference. Results revealed that participants more frequently 
misattributed the specific reward-context (‘A’) to unrewarded items (‘C;’ Experiments 1 and 2) 
and showed higher decision bias scores when asked to choose between two previously unrewarded 
items (‘C;’ Experiment 3) for successful compared with unsuccessful inference, but only when the 
value memory and decision bias tests were given after the associative inference test. These results 
suggest that a recombination-related retrieval mechanism that supports successful inference also 
contributes to the misattribution of reward-context in memory and further biases participants’ 
novel value-based decisions.
Keywords
inference; false memory; value; decision-making; episodic memory
Decisions are often guided by memory for past experiences. If a past choice led to a positive 
outcome, people are more likely to make that same choice again. Recent research in the field 
of value-based decision-making has examined this link between choice and memory (Doll, 
Shohamy & Daw, 2015; Duncan & Shohamy, 2016; Palombo, Keane & Verfaellie, 2015; 
Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). In these studies, participants learned stimulus-reward 
Address Correspondence to: Alexis C. Carpenter, Harvard University, Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, MA 
02138, 763-772-6095, alexiscarpenter@g.harvard.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
J Exp Psychol Gen. 2018 July ; 147(7): 988–1004. doi:10.1037/xge0000391.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

relationships gradually within the context of hundreds of repeated experiences. Because 
participants were exposed to many repeated trials over which they were able to 
incrementally learn the stimulus-reward association, it is difficult to determine exactly how 
specific valued events affect the interaction of episodic memory and future value-based 
choices. In everyday life, individuals often are not presented with multiple repetitions of past 
experiences prior to making decisions. Rather, individuals commonly make decisions based 
on limited prior information, where they may have only experienced the decision-relevant 
episode once. In contexts where the decision-relevant episode has only been experienced 
once, value-based choice has been proposed to depend on a mechanism that flexibly samples 
specific reward-related representations stored in memory (Bornstein, Khaw, Shohamy & 
Daw, 2017; Bornstein & Norman, 2017; Gluth, Sommer, Reiskamp & Büchel, 2015; Murty, 
FeldmanHall, Hunter, Phelps & Davachi, 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016).
Such proposals linking episodic memory and value-based decision-making require that 
single episodes be encoded in relation to the specific reward-context in which they occurred 
(Gluth, Sommer, Reiskamp & Büchel, 2015; Murty et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016). 
Recent behavioral experiments have found that (1) participants are indeed able to remember 
specific associations between an item and its reward-context and (2) memory for these 
detailed item-reward-context associations guide value-based decisions, particularly in 
situations where the participant decides between two options that they have never previously 
considered in relation to one another (e.g., novel choice between a previously experienced 
option and a new, never before experienced option; Murty et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 
2016). For example, when participants were asked to select between a lottery that was 
previously associated with either a high or low reward outcome (i.e., ‘old’ lottery) and a new 
lottery during a novel decision-making task, adaptive decisions were identified as decisions 
where participants selected ‘old’ lotteries that were associated with high-reward outcomes or 
avoided ‘old’ lotteries that were associated with low-reward outcomes, such that these 
decisions increased the likelihood that participants would receive a high-value reward 
(Murty et al., 2016). Importantly, the likelihood that participants made these adaptive 
decisions (i.e., chose high-value lotteries and avoided low-value lotteries) depended on their 
memory for the association between an ‘old’ lottery and its specific reward-context (i.e., 
whether the lottery was associated with a high- or low-value outcome), rather than item 
memory, where participants remember individual features of a lottery without retrieving any 
details of the context in which the lottery was previously experienced (Murty et al., 2016). In 
sum, these results suggest that at the time of the decision, participants retrieve rich 
associative memories consisting of relationships between specific features of a previous 
experience, such that they are able to remember the specific lottery (item) and its associated 
reward-context (source), thus providing participants with a detailed representation of a 
single past experience that they can flexibly apply to guide subsequent value-based choice 
(Murty et al., 2016).
Previous research suggests that such novel decisions (i.e., decisions between two options 
that have never been considered in relation to one another), based on single past experiences, 
may be supported by two key episodic memory mechanisms. The first is reward-related 
learning, where the relationship between the anticipated reward (i.e., reward-context) and the 
currently presented cue (i.e., the lottery) is encoded, thus linking a specific item to its 
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

potential future value (Murty et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016; Wimmer & Shohamy, 
2012; Wolosin, Zeithamova & Preston, 2012, 2013). The second is a flexible recombination 
mechanism that has been previously linked with episodic simulation of hypothetical 
experiences (Schacter & Addis 2007a, 2007b), where participants either simulate possible 
future scenarios that might occur as the result of a choice, or simulate alternative scenarios 
of what might have occurred as a result of having chosen differently in the past (for review, 
see Schacter, Benoit, De Brigard & Szpunar, 2015). Let us consider each mechanism in turn.
With respect to reward-related learning, specific reward-contexts presented during encoding 
affect explicit measures of memory for the source of the information, such that participants 
are able to remember the specific value associated with an item or episode (i.e., whether 
items were no-, low-, or high-value; Murty et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016). 
Consistent with this behavioral finding, research suggests that distributed patterns of 
activation within the hippocampus may reflect the specific value of the reward-context 
associated with each individual event, such that representations within the hippocampus 
differentiate between low- and high-value reward-contexts (Wolosin, Zeithamova & Preston, 
2013). Reward-context can also affect implicit measures of value-based decision bias, where 
participants’ financial risk-taking or choice of a familiar lottery increased (as compared to a 
new lottery) when they were primed with the previously learned high-value associations 
(Wimmer & Büchel, 2016), as well as when they could explicitly remember such 
associations (Murty et al., 2016). Thus, representations of previously learned associations 
include specific information identifying the reward-context in which the information was 
encoded (Wolosin, et al., 2013) and further guide future value-based decision-making 
(Murty et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016).
Flexible recombination processes support our ability to link together related information 
acquired in distinct episodes in order to construct simulations of novel future events 
(Schacter & Addis, 2007a, 2007b). We frequently encounter and simulate possible future 
scenarios in which we are required to make a choice between two options that we have never 
previously considered. In such instances of novel decision-making, flexible recombination 
during retrieval may play a particularly adaptive role, allowing one to recombine elements of 
past experiences in order to simulate the prospective scenario (Schacter, 2012; Schacter & 
Addis, 2007a, 2007b). This simulated mental representation can then guide future-oriented 
or novel decisions by allowing one to predict the expected value associated with the decision 
(Benoit, Gilbert &Burgess, 2011) and further allows one to link the prospective scenario to 
past and expected future rewards, allowing for an immediate experience of the future 
decision’s affective value (Boyer, 2008). This simulated mental representation can then 
guide future-oriented or novel decisions (Benoit, Gilbert &Burgess, 2011; Schacter et al., 
2015; Schacter, Benoit, & Szpunar, 2017).
This kind of flexible recombination that allows one to simulate future events is quite similar 
to the flexible recombination processes examined in studies of associative inference that 
allow one to link together related information acquired in distinct episodes in order to make 
novel connections that have not been directly experienced. In previous studies utilizing the 
associative inference paradigm, which requires participants to reactivate and flexibly 
recombine elements of overlapping episodes, participants learned direct associations 
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

between two items (e.g., individual ‘A’ and child ‘B’) and then learned overlapping 
associations between a member of the previously studied pair and a new item (e.g., child ‘B’ 
and individual ‘C;’ for evidence and review see Carpenter & Schacter, 2017; Schlichting & 
Preston, 2015; Zeithamova & Preston, 2010; Zeithamova, Schlichting, & Preston, 2012). 
Participants were also instructed to learn the indirect relationships between the ‘A’ and ‘C’ 
items that are mediated by the item ‘B’ (i.e., associative inference). Later, participants 
completed a memory test for both the directly learned associations (AB and BC) and the 
associative inferences (AC). Flexibly recombining and linking related information acquired 
in distinct episodes allows for novel connections that have not been directly experienced. For 
example, if one sees two different individuals (‘A’ and ‘C’) walking with the same child 
(‘B’) on two different days, retrieving and recombining details of the two episodes allows 
one to infer that the two individuals are related in some way by their relationship with the 
child. Further, if you have had a positive past experience with the first individual who was 
with the child but no prior experience with the second individual, retrieving and recombining 
details of these two episodes not only allows you to infer the relationship between the two 
individuals, but may transfer affective value associated with the first individual to your 
mental representation of the second individual, thereby updating the associated reward-
context and perhaps leading to a choice to interact with the second individual. Reward-
related learning in concert with such flexible recombination processes during retrieval could 
provide a mechanism by which previously rewarded associations can systematically update 
the value of unrewarded items from distinct yet related episodes. That is, unrewarded items 
may gain a positive value simply by way of flexibly recombining elements of previously 
separate experiences, which may further bias novel value-based decisions (for an example of 
simulation-based recombination see Benoit, Szpunar & Schacter, 2014).
Recent work from Martinez, Mack, Gelman and Preston (2016) provides evidence for the 
role of memory-guided decision bias in such social interactions. Specifically, results 
revealed that the reactivation of prior memories (e.g., remembering that individual ‘A’ 
cooperates) during new learning (e.g., learning that individual ‘A’ is friends with individual 
‘B’) allowed for the transfer of social reputation from individual ‘A’ to the associated 
individual ‘B,’ such that if individual ‘A’ cooperates then individual ‘B’ was treated as if 
they also cooperate (Martinez et al., 2016). That is, memories of past interactions and 
learned social connections biased participants’ decisions to interact with a member of a 
shared social group, even when they had not interacted with that particular group member in 
the past.
Indeed, a related line of research suggests that false ‘spreading’ or transfer of value can 
occur when a rewarded item (‘A’) was previously paired with an unrewarded item (‘B’), 
resulting in a preference for item ‘B’ even though it was never directly linked to receipt of 
the reward (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). Importantly, items ‘A’ and ‘B’ were originally 
learned in the same context (i.e., similar to how participants learned the direct relationship 
between ‘A’ and ‘B’ during the associative inference paradigm) and thus did not require 
participants to flexibly recombine elements of distinct episodes in order to learn the 
relationship between the two items, or to simulate the outcomes of possible future choices. 
Therefore, results suggest that value can be transferred within associative pairings, as 
participants showed a greater decision bias for unrewarded items that were directly paired 
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with a subsequently rewarded item as a result of reactivating the previously learned A-B 
association during the reward-learning phase (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). That is, the 
reward-context associated with a specific item can be spread or transferred to a related item 
that was presented within a single reactivated episode.
However, it is currently unknown whether the same flexible recombination processes that 
allow for novel associative inference, where the relationship between two items (‘A’ and 
‘C’) is mediated by a third item (‘B’), also support the biased updating of specific value 
representations across distinct contexts when episodes are only experienced once. Consistent 
with this possibility, in recent experiments using a modified associative inference paradigm, 
we directly linked such flexible recombination during retrieval to source memory errors: 
details of an overlapping scene were mistakenly attributed to memory for the original scene 
as a consequence of flexible recombination processes that support successful associative 
inference (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017). That is, participants were more prone to false 
memories that resulted from mistakenly combining scene details from related episodes when 
they made successful (versus unsuccessful) inferences about the relations between these 
episodes, but only when details were probed after (versus before) the associative inference 
test.
Similar to the way in which contextual scene details are mistakenly transferred across 
distinct past experiences following flexible retrieval supporting associative inference, we 
suggest that the specific reward-context of an original event may be misattributed to memory 
of an unrewarded overlapping event. If so, we would also predict that following successful 
inference, when participants are confronted with a novel decision between two previously 
unrewarded items, they will be biased to choose the unrewarded item that was linked 
indirectly to a rewarded item learned in a distinct context.
While our previous research implicates the role of recombination-related retrieval processes 
on subsequent source memory errors, there are two ways that participants can perform 
successfully on an associative inference test (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017). First, participants 
may integrate the AB and BC representations during encoding such that an integrated 
representation (ABC) is later retrieved during the test (i.e., integrative encoding; e.g., 
Shohamy & Wagner, 2008). Alternatively, participants may flexibly retrieve and recombine 
the previously studied AB and BC pairs during the associative inference test (i.e., 
recombination processes during retrieval; Carpenter & Schacter, 2017; Zeithamova & 
Preston, 2010). Prior neuroimaging studies suggest that both integrative encoding and 
recombination processes during retrieval play a role in successful associative inference 
(Zeithamova, Dominick & Preston, 2012; Zeithamova & Preston, 2010).
To directly test the role of flexible recombination processes in reward-related learning and 
subsequent novel decision-making, we used a modified version of an associative inference 
task that targets flexible recombination (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017; Preston, Shrager, 
Dudukovic, & Gabrieli, 2004; Zeithamova et al., 2012; Zeithamova & Preston, 2010) and, 
critically, incorporates aspects of the monetary incentive encoding task that targets reward-
related learning mechanisms (Adcock, Thangavel, Whitfield-Gabrieli, Knutson & Gabrieli, 
2006; Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012).
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In our version of the associative inference paradigm, during an initial session participants 
study person-object associations (AB) where the ‘A’ item is either linked to a value or no-
value reward-context (Experiment 1) or to a high-value or low-value reward-context 
(Experiment 2). Participants then study overlapping person-object associations (BC) where 
the ‘C’ item is either linked to a no-value or value reward-context, respectively. Participants 
are instructed to learn both the direct associations between each person and object (AB and 
BC) and the indirect association between the two people based on the shared object (AC). 
Additionally, participants are instructed to learn the reward-context associated with each 
item (i.e., value or no-value). After a delay, participants return for a second session in which 
they are tested for direct associations (AB, BC) and perform an associative inference test for 
novel combinations that are linked via the ‘B’ item (AC; see Figure 1).
In order to test whether retrieval-related recombination processes underlying successful 
inference contribute to the transfer of positive value across event boundaries to previously 
unrewarded items, in Experiments 1 and 2 participants’ memory for the specific value of 
each item (i.e., ‘A,’ ‘B’ and ‘C’) is explicitly probed. For one half of the AB and BC pairs, 
explicit value memory tests, where participants are asked to remember the specific reward-
context associated with a previously learned item (i.e., Experiment 1: value or no-value; 
Experiment 2: high-value, low-value, no-value), are given before the test of direct (AB, BC) 
and indirect (AC) associations, and for the other half, the value memory tests are given after 
the tests of direct and indirect associations.
The critical comparisons concern the proportions of what we call false value transfer (e.g., 
when participants attributed the specific reward-context of previously rewarded item ‘A’ to 
their memory of unrewarded item ‘C,’ thus remembering item ‘C’ as having been rewarded) 
on the value memory test given before versus after the associative inference test, for correct 
as compared to incorrect associative inference trials (i.e., AC). We distinguish among three 
competing hypotheses:
1.
If recombination during retrieval both enhances associative inference 
performance and increases false value transfer, then false value transfer scores 
should be higher for correct than incorrect inference trials, but only when the 
value memory test is given after the associative inference test (during which 
recombination occurs); there should be no difference in the proportion of false 
value transfer scores for correct vs. incorrect inference trials when the value 
memory test is given before the associative inference test.
2.
If false value transfer scores are higher for correct as compared to incorrect 
inference trials when the value memory tests are given both before and after the 
associative inference test, then these effects are consistent with integrative 
encoding processes.
3.
If there is no link at all between recombination during retrieval and false value 
transfer then there should be no difference between the proportion of false value 
transfer scores for correct and incorrect inference trials regardless of when the 
value memory tests are given.
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To test these hypotheses, we conducted three experiments that used the same basic paradigm 
and differed only in whether false value transfer was assessed with respect to explicit value 
memory using a value memory test (Experiments 1 and 2) or implicit decision bias using a 
decision bias test (Experiment 3; see figure 2 for a visualization of the predicted patterns of 
results for each hypothesis).
All three experiments provided evidence in favor of the first hypothesis outlined above: both 
the proportion of false value transfer and decision bias scores were higher for correct than 
incorrect inference trials, but only when the tests were given after the associative inference 
test, during which recombination occurs. These findings implicate recombination 
mechanisms during retrieval in both successful associative inference and false transfer of 
value across distinct episodes to previously unrewarded items, which further bias novel 
value-based decisions.
Experiment 1
Methods
Participants—A power analysis (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang & Buchner, 2007) based on effect 
sizes from our previous related work (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017) for the key predicted 
effect of interest revealed that a sample size of 20 would provide the ability to detect an 
effect after as compared to before successful inference conditions with power of >.80. Thus, 
we aimed for a sample of 24 usable participants. 25 young adults (mean age = 21.20, SD = 
2.09; 19 female) were recruited via advertisements at Boston University and Harvard 
University. All had normal vision and no history of neurological impairment. They gave 
informed consent, were treated in accordance with guidelines approved by the ethics 
committee at Harvard University, and received either course credit or pay for completing the 
study.
Reward-Related AB and BC Encoding—Both experimental sessions were executed on 
an Apple desktop computer using PsychoPy2 (v1.80.03). Stimuli consisted of 160 pairs of 
color images depicting people and common objects (e.g., toy truck). 80 total unique ABC 
triads (80 AB pairs, 80 BC pairs) were constructed. Overlapping AB and BC pairs were 
constructed such that two individuals (‘A’ and ‘C’) shared an association with an 
overlapping object (‘B;’ i.e., one ABC triad). Presentation locations were counterbalanced 
across participants such that each item was presented on the right/left equally often for both 
AB and BC pairs. Participants received one of two versions of the AB encoding task, which 
consisted of 80 pairs (i.e., AB) followed by the corresponding BC encoding task, which 
consisted of 80 pairs (i.e., BC; see Figure 1). Each pair was randomly presented for 5 
seconds within each encoding block (i.e., AB encoding and BC encoding; see Figure 1). 40 
pairs of the AB encoding task identified the ‘A’ item as a valued item (i.e., $$$ - $2.00 
reward), whereas the alternate 40 pairs identified the ‘A’ item as a no-value item (i.e., $0.00 
reward). For the 40 no-value AB pairs, the corresponding ‘C’ items during the BC encoding 
task were identified as valued items. If a triad’s ‘A’ item was associated with a value (i.e., 
valued-item), the corresponding ‘C’ item was not associated with any value (i.e., no-value 
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

item). All value associations were counterbalanced across participants, such that each ‘A’ or 
‘C’ item was associated with a value or no-value equally often.
Participants were instructed to learn both the direct associations (i.e., AB, BC) and the 
indirect associations (i.e., AC) along with whether an item was valued or not. Participants 
were told that if they were able to remember all of the information that was tied to a valued 
item (i.e., value information, direct association and indirect association) they would receive 
this reward at the end of the second session. Importantly, participants were instructed to use 
the same encoding strategy for valued and no-value pairs (Wolosin et al., 2013) in order to 
control for the possibility of a strategic tradeoff between learning valued as compared to no-
value pairs (Hennessee, Castel & Knowlton, 2017). Following each pair, participants were 
asked to provide a judgment of learning on a scale from 1 to 4 (1 = definitely forget, 4 = 
definitely remember). These judgments were collected in order to ensure participants’ 
attention during the encoding phase.
Value Memory Test—Following a 48-hour delay, participants came to the lab to complete 
the second session. Three value memory questions were constructed for each of the 80 ABC 
triads (one question related to each distinct item – ‘A’, ‘B’ or ‘C’). A cutout of the 
individual (‘A’ or ‘C’) or object (‘B’) was presented to the right of the value memory 
question in order to indicate to which item the question referred. Participants were asked to 
explicitly remember whether an item was valued or not valued and were given three possible 
answer choices: 1) Valued-item ($$$), 2) No-value item, or 3) Unsure. Immediately 
following participants’ value memory response they were asked to rate their confidence in 
their response on a scale from 1 to 4 (1 = very unsure, 4 = very sure). The presentation order 
of the value memory questions was randomized for each participant and the questions were 
self-paced.
Participants answered the value memory questions for one half of the 80 ABC triads before 
being tested on the directly learned and associative inference trials. After participants were 
tested on the directly learned and associative inference trials, they completed the value 
memory questions for the alternate half of the 80 ABC triads.
Directly Learned and Associative Inference Trials—Following the first half of the 
value memory questions, participants were tested on directly learned (AB and BC) and 
associative inference trials (AC). During each directly learned trial, a single cue individual 
(e.g., an ‘A’ or ‘C’ individual) was presented at the top of the screen and two choice objects 
were presented at the bottom of the screen (e.g., the correct ‘B’ object pairing and a lure ‘B’ 
object from a different ABC triad; see Figure 1). On the associative inference trials, a cue 
individual (‘A’) was presented along with two individuals at the bottom of the screen (i.e., 
the correct ‘C’ individual from the ABC triad and a lure ‘C’ individual from another triad). 
Participants were instructed on associative inference trials that the association between the 
cue (‘A’) and the correct choice (‘C’) was indirect, mediated through an object (‘B’) that 
shared an association with both the cue and the correct choice during encoding. Participants 
were instructed to select one of the two choice objects/individuals presented or to respond 
“neither” when they believed that the items had not been previously paired. The lure choice 
options were pseudo-randomly sampled from different triads with the constraint being that 
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

each lure option was of the same trial type as the correct option (e.g., if the correct option 
was a ‘B’ item then the lure option was another familiar ‘B’ item from a different triad). All 
directly learned and associative inference trials were self-paced. Importantly, for both 
directly learned and associative inference trials, the incorrect choice was a familiar item that 
had been studied in the context of another individual independent from the cue. Thus, 
correct responses required retrieval of learned associations and could not be made based on 
the familiarity of the choice. The presentation order of the trials was randomized with the 
only constraint being that AC associative inference trials were shown before their 
corresponding AB and BC directly learned trials in order to ensure that participants were not 
able to form an association between ‘A’ and ‘C’ individuals during test. Following each of 
the directly learned and associative inference trials, participants rated their confidence in 
their response on a scale from 1 to 4 (1 = very unsure, 4 = very sure).
Coding of True Memory and False Value Transfer—True value memory was defined 
as value memory questions for which the participant chose the correct value that was 
associated with the currently cued item. False value transfer was defined as value memory 
questions for which the participant chose the correct value associated with the overlapping 
‘A’ (or ‘C’) item and attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘C’ (or ‘A’) item. 
False value transfer was analyzed for ABC triads for which participants correctly inferred 
the relationship between ‘A’ and ‘C’ compared to triads for which the inference was not 
correctly made. Additionally, false value transfer was evaluated both before explicit retrieval 
of the inference (i.e., before AC associative inference trials) and after inferential retrieval in 
order to selectively compare the distinct effects of integration during encoding and flexible 
recombination at retrieval on subsequent false value transfer.
Results and Discussion
Directly Learned and Associative Inference Trials—First we evaluated overall 
accurate on 73% of directly learned trials (Mdirect = 0.73, SE = 0.02; range: 0.55 to 0.87) and 
responded ‘neither’ on 2% of directly learned trials (Mneither = 0.02, SE = 0.007; range: 0 to 
0.13). On average, participants were accurate on 63% of associative inference trials 
(Massociative inference = 0.63, SE = 0.02; range: 0.33 to 0.75) and responded ‘neither’ on 7% 
of associative inference trials (Mneither = 0.07, SE = 0.02; range: 0 to 0.38). Importantly, 
memory performance for directly learned valued pairs was positively correlated with 
performance for directly learned non-valued pairs (r = 0.58, p = .002), suggesting that there 
was not a tradeoff between learning valued and non-valued pairs. Consistent with previous 
research (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017; Zeithamova & Preston, 2010), we found that reaction 
times on associative inference trials (Massociative inference = 4700 msec, SE = 408) were 
significantly longer than directly learned trials (Mdirect = 3364 msec, SE = 251), suggesting 
that an additional recombination-related retrieval mechanism was used for inferential versus 
direct retrieval (t(24) = 6.52, p < .001, mean difference = 1336, 95% CI = [913, 1759], d = 
1.30). Further, participants assigned significantly higher confidence ratings to their 
responses on directly learned (Mdirect = 2.84, SE = 0.09) as compared to associative 
inference trials (Massociative inference = 2.34, SE = 0.10), indicating that participants were 
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

those resulting from recombination (t(24) = 10.93, p < .001, mean difference = 0.50, 95% CI 
= [0.41, 0.60], d = 2.18).
flexible recombination during associative inference on subsequent false value transfer across 
event boundaries, we examined the proportion of value memory questions for which the 
attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘C’ (or ‘A’) item with a 2 (time: before 
vs. after inference retrieval) X 2 (inference: correct vs. incorrect inference) repeated 
measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Importantly, only trials for which participants 
correctly remembered the directly learned association were included in subsequent analyses. 
Results revealed no main effect of time, F(1,24) < 1, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.03, no main effect of 
inference, F(1,24) = 2.91, p = .10, ηp2 = 0.11, and a significant time by inference interaction, 
F(1,24) = 5.69, p = .025, ηp2 = 0.19 (see Fig. 2). Participants more frequently falsely 
attributed value to the overlapping event after successful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.49, 
SE = 0.04) than before successful inference retrieval (Mbefore = 0.40, SE = 0.04; t(24) = 
2.21, p = .037, mean difference = 0.09, 95% CI = [0.006, 0.17], d = 0.44). Further, 
participants did not falsely attribute value more frequently to the overlapping event after 
unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.37, SE = 0.05) than before unsuccessful 
inference retrieval (Mbefore = 0.39, SE = 0.05; t(24) < 1, p > .25, mean difference = 0.03, 
95% CI = [−0.07, 0.12], d = 0.11). Similarly, participants did not falsely attribute value more 
frequently to the overlapping event before successful inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.40, SE 
= 0.04) than before unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mincorrect = 0.39, SE = 0.05; t(24) < 1, p 
> .25, mean difference = −0.01, 95% CI = [−0.09, 0.07], d = 0.05). Critically, participants 
falsely attributed value more often to the overlapping event after successful inference 
retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.49, SE = 0.04) than after unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mincorrect = 
0.37, SE = 0.05; t(24) = 2.44, p = .022, mean difference = 0.12, 95% CI = [0.02, 0.22], d = 
0.49), suggesting that recombination processes underlying successful inference at retrieval 
can also lead to false transfer of value to unrewarded items (see Figure 3 and Supplemental 
Table 1 for means and raw trial numbers).
recombination during associative inference on subsequent false value transfer within 
associative pairs, we examined the proportion of value memory questions for which the 
attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘B’ item with a 2 (time: before vs. after 
ANOVA. Results revealed no main effect of time, F(1,24) < 1, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.02, no main 
effect of inference, F(1,24) = 1.82, p = .19, ηp2 = 0.07, and no time by inference interaction, 
F(1,24) = 1.67, p = .21, ηp2 = 0.07. Thus, false value transfer scores for unrewarded ‘B’ 
items were similar both before (Mbefore = 0.47, SE = 0.06) and after successful inference 
retrieval (Mafter = 0.46, SE = 0.06). Additionally, false value transfer scores for unrewarded 
‘B’ items were similar both before (Mbefore = 0.44, SE = 0.06) and after unsuccessful 
inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.41, SE = 0.05).
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

True Value Memory—To examine the effects of flexible recombination during retrieval on 
subsequent true value memory, we examined correct responses on the value memory 
questions with a 2 (time: before vs. after inference retrieval) X 2 (inference: correct vs. 
incorrect inference) repeated measures ANOVA. Results revealed no main effect of time, 
F(1,24) < 1, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.001, no time by inference interaction, F(1,24) = 1.01, p > .25, 
ηp2 = 0.04, but a main effect of inference, F(1,24) = 4.49, p = .045, ηp2 = 0.16, where true 
memory scores were moderately higher for unsuccessful (M = 0.52, SE = 0.03) than 
successful inference (M = 0.49, SE = 0.02). True memory scores were similar both before 
(Mbefore = 0.50, SE = 0.02) and after successful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.58, SE = 
0.03). Additionally, true memory scores were similar both before (Mbefore = 0.51, SE = 0.04) 
and after unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.53, SE = 0.02; see Figure 4).
In summary, the results of Experiment 1 showed that false value transfer scores were higher 
for correct than incorrect inference trials, but only when the value memory test was given 
after the associative inference test, during which recombination occurs. These findings help 
to distinguish among the three competing hypotheses enumerated in the Introduction. Our 
results support hypothesis 1 that recombination occurring during retrieval both enhances 
associative inference performance and increases false transfer of value to memories for 
unrewarded items. By contrast, the results failed to support hypothesis 2 that integrative 
encoding is responsible for false value transfer, because this hypothesis predicts that false 
value transfer scores should be higher for correct as compared to incorrect inference trials 
regardless of whether the value memory tests are given before or after the associative 
inference test. The results also allow us to reject hypothesis 3, which claims no relation 
between recombination during retrieval and false value transfer, because we found clear 
evidence for such a relation. Thus, Experiment 1 extends to the novel domain of false value 
transfer a parallel pattern of results previously reported for contextual details by Carpenter 
and Schacter (2017), who found that participants were more prone to false memories that 
resulted from mistakenly combining contextual scene details from related episodes 
following successful inferences about the relations between these episodes, but only when 
these details were probed after the associative inference test.
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we attempt to replicate and extend the critical results of Experiment 1 by 
investigating the specificity of the effects produced by retrieval-related recombination 
processes underlying successful inference on false transfer of value to previously 
unrewarded items. To address this issue, participants learned overlapping AB and BC pairs 
where one item in the ABC triad was either a high- or low-value item (compared to valued 
or no-value in Experiment 1). During both value-transfer tests, given before and after the 
directly learned and associative inference trials, participants were asked to remember the 
specific value (i.e., high- or low-value) associated with each individual item. That is, 
Experiment 2 investigated whether the falsely transferred reward-context tied to a previously 
unrewarded item includes information as to the context’s specific degree of value (i.e., high- 
or low-value), thus going beyond the valued/no-value distinction used in Experiment 1.
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Method
Participants—25 young adults (mean age = 20.70, SD = 2.39; 14 female) were recruited 
via advertisements at Boston University and Harvard University. The procedures regarding 
recruitment, eligibility criteria, informed consent and ethical guidelines were identical to 
Experiment 1. One participant was excluded from all subsequent analyses because they were 
accurate on less than 4 percent of the associative inference trials; thus, our final sample 
consisted of 24 participants.
Summary of the Procedure—Participants came to the lab for two sessions, separated by 
a 48-hour delay. The design parameters and stimuli presented during the first session were 
the same as in Experiment 1 with one modification: 20 pairs of the AB encoding task 
identified the ‘A’ item as a high-value item (i.e., $$$ - $2.00 reward), whereas 20 pairs 
identified the ‘A’ item as a low-value item (i.e., $ - $0.10 reward). The remaining 40 pairs 
did not associate any value with the ‘A’ item (i.e., no-value item). For the 40 no-value pairs, 
20 of the corresponding ‘C’ items during the BC encoding task were identified as high-value 
items, whereas the other 20 ‘C’ items were identified as low-value items. If a triad’s ‘A’ 
item was associated with any value (i.e., either high- or low-value items), the corresponding 
‘C’ item was not associated with any value (i.e., no-value item). Participants received one of 
four versions of the AB encoding task such that all value associations were counterbalanced 
across participants, where each ‘A’ or ‘C’ item was associated with high-, low-, or no-value 
equally often.
Similar to Experiment 1, participants were instructed to learn both the direct associations 
(i.e., AB, BC) and the indirect associations (i.e., AC) along with the specific value 
associated with each item. Participants were told that if they were able to remember all of 
the information that was tied to valued item (i.e., specific value information, direct 
association and indirect association) they would receive this reward at the end of the second 
session. Identical to Experiment 1, participants were instructed to use the same encoding 
strategy for high-value and low-value pairs (Hennessee, Castel & Knowlton, 2017; Wolosin 
et al., 2013) and were asked to provide a judgment of learning following each pair.
The design parameters and stimuli presented during the second session were the same in 
Experiment 2 as in Experiment 1 with one modification: Participants were asked to 
explicitly remember the specific value of the currently cued item and were given four 
possible answer choices: 1) High-value item ($$$), 2) Low-value item ($), 3) No-value item, 
or 4) Unsure. The test of directly learned (AB and BC) and associative inference trials (AC) 
was the same in Experiment 2 as in Experiment 1.
Coding of True Memory and False Value Transfer—True value memory was defined 
as value memory questions for which the participant chose the correct specific value (i.e., 
high- vs. low-value) that was associated with the currently cued item. False value transfer 
was defined as value memory questions for which the participant chose the correct specific 
value (i.e., high- vs. low-value) associated with the overlapping ‘A’ (or ‘C’) item and 
attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘C’ (or ‘A’) item. False value transfer 
was analyzed for ABC triads for which participants correctly inferred the relationship 
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

between ‘A’ and ‘C’ compared to triads for which the inference was not correctly made. 
Additionally, false value transfer was evaluated both before explicit retrieval of the inference 
(i.e., before AC associative inference trials) and after inferential retrieval in order to 
selectively compare the distinct effects of integration during encoding and flexible 
recombination at retrieval on subsequent false value transfer.
Results and Discussion
Directly Learned and Associative Inference Trials—First we evaluated overall 
accurate on 67% of directly learned trials (Mdirect = 0.67, SE = 0.03; range: 0.43 to 0.84) and 
responded ‘neither’ on 9% of directly learned trials (Mneither = 0.09, SE = 0.03; range: 0 to 
0.53). On average, participants were accurate on 54% of associative inference trials 
(Massociative inference = 0.54, SE = 0.03; range: 0.14 to 0.77) and responded ‘neither’ on 20% 
of associative inference trials (Mneither = 0.20, SE = 0.05; range: 0 to 0.78). Importantly, 
memory performance for directly learned high-value pairs was positively correlated with 
performance for directly learned low-value pairs (r = 0.80, p < .001), suggesting that there 
was not a tradeoff between learning high-value and low-value pairs. Consistent with 
previous research (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017; Zeithamova & Preston, 2010), we found 
significantly longer reaction times on associative inference trials (Massociative inference = 4491 
msec, SE = 251) as compared to directly learned trials (Mdirect = 3037 msec, SE = 118), 
suggesting that an additional recombination-related retrieval mechanism was used for 
inferential versus direct retrieval (t(23) = 8.17, p < .001, mean difference = 1.45, 95% CI = 
[1.09, 1.82], d = 1.67). Further, participants assigned significantly higher confidence ratings 
to their responses on directly learned (Mdirect = 2.83, SE = 0.10) as compared to associative 
inference trials (Massociative inference = 2.39, SE = 0.09), indicating that participants were 
those resulting from recombination (t(23) = 7.20, p < .001, mean difference = 0.44, 95% CI 
= [0.31, 0.56], d = 1.47).
flexible recombination during associative inference on subsequent false value transfer across 
event boundaries, we examined the proportion of value memory questions for which the 
attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘C’ (or ‘A’) item with a 2 (time: before 
vs. after inference retrieval) X 2 (inference: correct vs. incorrect inference) repeated 
measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Importantly, only trials for which participants 
correctly remembered the directly learned association were included in subsequent analyses. 
Results revealed no main effect of time, F(1,23) = 1.23, p > 0.25, ηp2 = 0.05, no main effect 
of inference, F(1,23) < 1, p >.25, ηp2 = 0.005, but a significant time by inference interaction, 
F(1,23) = 11.53, p = .002, ηp2 = 0.33 (see Fig. 2). Participants more frequently falsely 
attributed value to the overlapping event after successful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.28, 
SE = 0.03) than before successful inference retrieval (Mbefore = 0.20, SE = 0.02; t(23) = 
2.48, p = .018, mean difference = 0.08, 95% CI = [0.01, 0.14], d = 0.51). Further, 
participants did not falsely attribute value more frequently to the overlapping event after 
unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.23, SE = 0.03) than before unsuccessful 
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

inference retrieval (Mbefore = 0.24, SE = 0.03; t(23) < 1, p > .25, mean difference = −0.02, 
95% CI = [−0.08, 0.05], d = 0.09). Similarly, participants did not falsely attribute value more 
frequently to the overlapping event before successful inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.20, SE 
= 0.02) than before unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mincorrect = 0.24, SE = 0.03; t(23) = 
1.73, p = .10, mean difference = −0.04, 95% CI = [−0.09, 0.008], d = 0.34). Critically, 
participants falsely attributed value more often to the overlapping event after successful 
inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.28, SE = 0.03) than after unsuccessful inference retrieval 
(Mincorrect = 0.23, SE = 0.03; t(23) = 2.34, p = .028, mean difference = 0.05, 95% CI = 
[0.006, 0.10], d = 0.47), suggesting that recombination processes underlying successful 
inference at retrieval can also lead to false transfer of value to unrewarded items (see Figure 
5 and Supplemental Table 1 for means and raw trial numbers).
recombination mechanisms during associative inference on subsequent false value transfer 
within associative pairs, we examined the proportion of value memory questions for which 
the participant chose the correct value associated with the overlapping ‘A’ (or ‘C’) item and 
attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘B’ item with a 2 (time: before vs. after 
ANOVA. Results revealed no main effect of time, F(1,23) < 1, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.001, no main 
effect of inference, F(1,23) = 1.32, p = 0.26, ηp2 = 0.05, and no time by inference 
interaction, F(1,23) < 1, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.002. Thus, false value transfer scores for 
unrewarded ‘B’ items were similar both before (Mbefore = 0.30, SE = 0.03) and after 
successful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.30, SE = 0.04). Additionally, false value transfer 
scores for unrewarded ‘B’ items were similar both before (Mbefore = 0.26, SE = 0.03) and 
after unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.27, SE = 0.03).
True Value Memory—To examine the effects of flexible recombination mechanisms 
during retrieval on subsequent true value memory, we examined correct responses on the 
value memory questions with a 2 (time: before vs. after inference retrieval) X 2 (inference: 
correct vs. incorrect inference) repeated measures ANOVA. Results revealed no main effect 
of time, F(1,23) = 1.31, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.05, no main effect of inference, F(1,23) < 1, p > .25, 
ηp2 = 0.01, and no time by inference interaction, F(1,23) = 1.56, p = .22, ηp2 = 0.06. Thus, 
true memory scores were similar both before (Mbefore = 0.51, SE = 0.03) and after 
successful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.44, SE = 0.05; t(23) = 1.74, p = .096, mean 
difference = 0.07, 95% CI = [−0.01, 0.16], d = 0.36). Additionally, true memory scores were 
similar both before (Mbefore = 0.49, SE = 0.04) and after unsuccessful inference retrieval 
(Mafter = 0.48, SE = 0.05; t(23) < 1, p > .25, mean difference = 0.01, 95% CI = [−0.09, 
0.11], d = 0.06; see Figure 4).
In summary, the results of Experiment 2 provide further evidence that flexible recombination 
processes required for successful associative inference also produce increases in the 
frequency with which participants falsely transfer value to an overlapping event under 
conditions in which the falsely transferred reward-context includes information about the 
context’s specific degree of value (i.e., high- or low-value): false value transfer scores 
increased significantly after but not before successful compared to unsuccessful inferential 
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

retrieval. These findings build on those from Experiment 1 showing false value transfer for a 
valued/no-value contrast, and again extend our earlier false memory effects for contextual 
scene details (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017), and provide additional evidence for a link 
between processes that support successful inferential retrieval and those that allow for the 
updating of the reward-contexts associated with previously unrewarded events. If associative 
inference related processes did not affect participants’ memory for the value associated with 
previously learned events, then false value transfer scores would not have differed for correct 
and incorrect inferences, but they did. As in Experiment 1, our finding that the observed 
increase in false value transfer scores occurred only after the associative inference test was 
given implicates recombination during retrieval as the source of the effect, rather than 
integration during encoding.
Further, true memory scores and false value transfer to unrewarded ‘B’ items showed no 
relationship to correct versus incorrect inferential retrieval either before or after the 
associative inference test was presented. The lack of a difference in true memory scores 
indicates that the observed updating of reward-context as a result of successful inference is 
selective to the updating of events that were previously unrewarded. The lack of a difference 
in false value transfer to unrewarded ‘B’ items indicates that a retrieval-related 
recombination mechanism that supports successful inference is selectively involved in the 
transfer or false binding of reward-context across event boundaries. Thus, our results 
specifically speak to the transfer of a positive reward-context across distinct events to an 
unrewarded item that was indirectly linked to the rewarded item following the reactivation 
and recombination of both AB and BC events that allows for successful inference.
Experiment 3
Experiments 1 and 2 have provided evidence for false value transfer using tests that probe 
explicit recall of value context. In Experiment 3, we asked whether retrieval-related 
recombination processes underlying successful inference also contribute to implicit biasing 
of future decisions between two previously unrewarded items. To address this issue, 
participants were asked to choose between two unrewarded items, selecting the “luckier” 
item for potential winnings awarded at the end of the experiment (i.e., decision bias test; 
Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). Previous research using a similar decision bias test indeed 
found evidence for false value transfer to an unrewarded item that was directly paired with a 
rewarded item following multiple repetitions during encoding (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). 
In contrast, our manipulation of interest concerns single-trial learning and targets 
recombination mechanisms during retrieval rather than integration during encoding. In order 
to directly test the role of recombination during retrieval as compared to integration during 
encoding on subsequent decision bias, implicit decision bias tests were given before the test 
of direct (AB, BC) and indirect (AC) associations for one half of the AB and BC pairs, and 
for the other half, the preference tests were given after the tests of direct and indirect 
associations. Because the results of Experiment 2 showed that false value transfer following 
successful inference was specific to the level of value associated with the reward context 
(i.e., high- vs. low-value reward context), in Experiment 3 we utilized this manipulation of 
degree of value and compared decision bias scores for unrewarded items from high- and 
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

low-value triads (rather than unrewarded items from valued vs. no-value triads from 
Experiment 1).
Our logic for Experiment 3 closely follows that of Experiment 1 and Experiment 2:
1.
If recombination during retrieval both enhances associative inference 
performance and biases implicit decisions, then decision bias scores should be 
higher for correct than incorrect inference trials, but only when the decision bias 
test is given after the associative inference test (during which recombination 
occurs).
2.
If decision bias scores are higher for correct as compared to incorrect inference 
trials independent on whether the decision bias tests are given before or after the 
associative inference test, then these effects are consistent with integrative 
encoding processes.
3.
If there is no link at all between recombination during retrieval and implicit 
decision bias then there should be no difference between the decision bias scores 
for correct and incorrect inference trials regardless of when the decision bias 
tests are given.
Method
Participants—24 young adults (mean age = 20.20, SD = 1.79; 16 female) were recruited 
via advertisements at Boston University and Harvard University. The procedures regarding 
recruitment, eligibility criteria, informed consent and ethical guidelines were identical to 
Experiments 1 and 2.
Summary of the Procedure—Participants came to the lab for two sessions, separated by 
a 48-hour delay. The design parameters and stimuli presented during the first session were 
the same in Experiment 3 as in Experiment 2. During the second session, Experiment 3 
utilized a decision bias test before and after the test of directly learned (AB and BC) and 
associative inference trials (AC). The test of directly learned and associative inference trials 
was the same in Experiment 3 as in Experiment 2. Following both sets of decision bias trials 
and all of the directly learned/associative inference trials, participants completed all of the 
value memory test trials for the 80 ABC triads in the same manner as described for 
Experiment 2.
Decision Bias Test—In accordance with previous research utilizing a similar decision 
bias test, participants were presented with 160 pairs of items that they had previously seen 
during the first session and were asked to select the “luckier” item for potential winnings at 
the end of the second session. Participants were given a short response time (2.5s) to make 
their choice, in order to ensure that they were not recalling the direct and indirect 
associations for both options before making their choice (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). 
Following each decision, participants were asked to rate the level of their preference for the 
item that they previously chose on a scale from 1 to 4 (1 = no preference, 4 = high 
preference). Participants’ responses on the preference rating were self-paced. For items that 
were rewarded, high-value items were always paired with a low-value item of the same item 
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

type. For example, a high-value ‘A’ item was always paired with a low-value ‘A’ item, 
whereas a high-value ‘C’ item was always paired with a low-value ‘C’ item. For items that 
were previously unrewarded, items that were indirectly associated with a high-value item 
were always paired with items that were indirectly associated with a low-value item of the 
same item type. For example, if the ‘A’ item in the triad was a high-value item, the 
corresponding ‘C’ item in that triad was paired with another unrewarded ‘C’ item that was 
indirectly linked to a low-value ‘A’ item. For these critical trials of interest, participants 
were asked to choose between two unrewarded ‘C’ items and thus should have no significant 
level of decision bias.
In accordance with previous research using a similar decision bias task, all trials were 
presented at random and participants completed four repetitions of each trial randomly 
interspersed (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). Participants answered the decision bias questions 
for one half of the 80 ABC triads before being tested on the directly learned and associative 
inference trials. After participants were tested on the directly learned and associative 
inference trials, they completed the decision bias questions for the alternate half of the 80 
ABC triads.
Results
Directly Learned and Associative Inference Trials—Again we evaluated overall 
accurate on 67% of directly learned trials (Mdirect = 0.67, SE = 0.03; range: 0.44 to 0.86) and 
responded ‘neither’ on 3% of directly learned trials (Mneither = 0.03, SE = 0.02; range: 0 to 
0.33). On average, participants were accurate on 61% of associative inference trials 
(Massociative inference = 0.61, SE = 0.03; range: 0.30 to 0.79) and responded ‘neither’ on 5% 
of associative inference trials (Mneither = 0.05, SE = 0.03; range: 0 to 0.59). Importantly, 
memory performance for directly learned high-value pairs was positively correlated with 
performance for directly learned low-value pairs (r = 0.83, p < .001), again suggesting that 
there was not a tradeoff between learning high-value and low-value pairs. We found 
significantly longer reaction times on associative inference trials (Massociative inference = 3638 
msec, SE = 324) as compared to directly learned trials (Mdirect = 2737 msec, SE = 190), 
suggesting an additional recombination-related retrieval mechanism is elicited for inferential 
versus direct retrieval (t(23) = 5.17, p < .001, mean difference = 0.90, 95% CI = [0.54, 1.26], 
d = 1.06). Further, participants assigned significantly higher confidence ratings to their 
responses on directly learned (Mdirect = 2.78, SE = 0.06) as compared to associative 
inference trials (Massociative inference = 2.32, SE = 0.07), indicating that participants were 
those resulting from recombination (t(23) = 8.63, p < .001, mean difference = 0.47, 95% CI 
= [0.35, 0.58], d = 1.76).
Decision Bias Scores—To examine the effects of flexible recombination during 
associative inference on subsequent implicit decision bias, we examined the proportion of 
decision bias trials for which the participant chose the unrewarded item that was indirectly 
linked to a high-value item as compared to a low-value item with a 2 (time: before vs. after 
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ANOVA. Importantly, only trials for which participants correctly remembered the directly 
learned association were included in subsequent analyses. Results revealed no main effect of 
time, F(1,23) < 1, p > .25, ηp2 = 0.004, a main effect of inference, F(1,23) = 5.13, p = .03, 
ηp2 = 0.18, and a significant time by inference interaction, F(1,23) = 4.39, p = .05, ηp2 = 
0.16 (see Fig. 3). Participants more frequently chose the unrewarded item that was indirectly 
linked to the high-value item after successful inference retrieval (Mafter = 0.61, SE = 0.04) 
than before successful inference retrieval (Mbefore = 0.52, SE = 0.03; t(23) = 2.07, p = .05, 
mean difference = 0.09, 95% CI = [0.00, 0.18], d = 0.42). Further, participants did not 
choose the unrewarded high-value item more frequently after unsuccessful inference 
retrieval (Mafter = 0.43, SE = 0.05) than before unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mbefore = 
0.50, SE = 0.04; t(23) = 1.09, p > .25, mean difference = −0.07, 95% CI = [−0.20, 0.06], d = 
0.22). Similarly, participants did not choose the unrewarded high-value item more often 
before successful inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.52, SE = 0.03) than before unsuccessful 
inference retrieval (Mincorrect = 0.50, SE = 0.04; t(23) < 1, p > .25, mean difference = 0.02, 
95% CI = [−0.09, 0.13], d = 0.07). Critically, participants chose the unrewarded high-value 
item more frequently after successful inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.61, SE = 0.04) than 
after unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mincorrect = 0.43, SE = 0.05; t(23) = 2.87, p = .009, 
mean difference = 0.18, 95% CI = [0.05, 0.31], d = 0.59), suggesting that recombination 
processes underlying successful inference at retrieval can also bias participants choice 
toward unrewarded items that were indirectly tied to a high-value item (see Figure 6 and 
Supplemental Table 1 for means and raw trial numbers).
Importantly, in order to determine whether our decision bias scores were significantly 
different from chance we conducted a one-sample t-test comparing all conditions to chance 
(i.e., 0.50). Critically, the only condition in which decision bias scores significantly differed 
from chance was after successful inference (Mcorrect = 0.61, SE = 0.04; t(23) = 2.88, p = .
008, mean difference = 0.11, 95% CI = [0.03, 0.19], d = 0.59). No significant differences 
from chance were found after unsuccessful inference (Mincorrect = 0.43, SE = 0.05; t(23) = 
1.43, p = .17, mean difference = −0.07, 95% CI = [−0.17, 0.03], d = 0.29), before successful 
inference (Mcorrect = 0.52, SE = 0.03; t(23) < 1, p > .25, mean difference = 0.02, 95% CI = 
[−0.04, 0.07], d = 0.12) or before unsuccessful inference (Mincorrect = 0.50, SE = 0.04; t(23) 
< 1, p > .25, mean difference = −0.001, 95% CI = [−0.09, 0.09], d = 0.007).
flexible recombination mechanisms during associative inference on subsequent false value 
transfer across event boundaries, we examined the proportion of value memory questions for 
which the participant chose the correct value associated with the overlapping ‘A’ (or ‘C’) 
item and attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘C’ (or ‘A’) item with a 
paired samples t-test comparing trials for which participants got the inference correct to 
incorrect inference trials. Critically, the value memory test for Experiment 3 differs from 
Experiment 2 in that all of the value memory questions were tested after all of the directly 
learned and associative inference trials. Consistent with results from Experiment 2, 
participants falsely attributed value more often to the overlapping event after successful 
inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.28, SE = 0.02) than after unsuccessful inference retrieval 
(Mincorrect = 0.21, SE = 0.03; t(23) = 2.52, p = .019, mean difference = 0.07, 95% CI = [0.01, 
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

0.13], d = 0.51), suggesting that recombination processes underlying successful inference at 
retrieval can also lead to false transfer of value to unrewarded items.
recombination mechanisms during associative inference on subsequent false value transfer 
within associative pairs, we examined the proportion of value memory questions for which 
the participant chose the correct value associated with the overlapping ‘A’ (or ‘C’) item and 
attributed the value to the currently cued unrewarded ‘B’ item with a paired samples t-test 
comparing trials for which participants got the inference correct to incorrect inference trials. 
Results revealed no significant difference between false value transfer scores for unrewarded 
‘B’ items following successful inference retrieval (Mcorrect = 0.30, SE = 0.03) compared to 
after unsuccessful inference retrieval (Mincorrect = 0.25, SE = 0.03; t(23) = 1.50, p = .16, 
mean difference = 0.04, 95% CI = [0.02, 0.10], d = 0.30).
True Value Memory—To examine the effects of flexible recombination mechanisms 
during retrieval on subsequent true value memory, we examined correct responses on the 
value memory questions with a paired-samples t-test. Consistent with results from 
Experiment 2, results revealed no significant difference in the proportion of correct 
responses on the value memory test for correct (Mcorrect = 0.40, SE = 0.02) as compared to 
incorrect inference trials (Mincorrect = 0.41, SE = 0.02; t(23) < 1, p > .25, mean difference = 
0.007, 95% CI = [−0.03, 0.05], d = 0.08).
Discussion
The results of Experiment 3 replicate and extend the false value transfer results of 
Experiments 1 and 2. Critically, results of the decision bias test from Experiment 3 support 
the role of recombination during retrieval in both successful associative inference and 
biasing implicit decisions. That is, participants’ implicit decision bias scores were 
significantly higher following correct than incorrect inference trials, but only when the 
decision bias test was given after the associative inference test during which the overlapping 
AB and BC associations are reactivated and flexibly recombined in order to infer the 
relationship between ‘A’ and ‘C.’ Results revealed no significant difference in decision bias 
scores for correct as compared to incorrect inference when the decision bias test was given 
before inferential retrieval. In sum, the current results support the role of a recombination-
related retrieval mechanism in both the explicit transfer of reward-context to a previously 
unrewarded item that was indirectly linked to a rewarded item (Experiments 1 and 2) and 
biasing subsequent value-based decision-making when participants are required to choose 
between two previously unrewarded items (Experiment 3).
General Discussion
The three experiments reported here provide evidence that the same flexible retrieval 
mechanism that supports successful inferential retrieval also allows for the systematic 
updating of reward-contexts that bias novel value-based decisions. Experiments 1 and 2 
provided evidence that flexible retrieval processes required for successful associative 
inference also produce increases in false value transfer scores when the value memory test is 
given after the test of directly learned and associative inference trials. Experiment 2 
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

replicated and extended the results of Experiment 1 by providing evidence that the specific 
value (i.e., high- and low-value) associated with an item is more frequently transferred to an 
overlapping non-valued item only following successful inference. The results of Experiment 
3 extend those of Experiments 1 and 2 by providing evidence that recombination-related 
retrieval processes underlying successful inference also contribute to the implicit biasing of 
participants’ future decisions when they are asked to choose between two previously 
unrewarded items that were indirectly tied to rewarded items of differing value (i.e., 
indirectly associated with a high- or low-value item). Thus, whereas Experiment 1 showed 
that general reward-context (i.e., valued vs. no-value) can be falsely transferred and biases 
novel decisions following successful inference as compared to unsuccessful inference, 
Experiments 2 and 3 provide evidence that these effects can also occur for a specific reward-
context (i.e., high- vs. low-value reward). That is, only following successful inference, 
participants more frequently transferred the specific reward-context from the rewarded item 
to the unrewarded item (e.g., high-value ‘A’ item results in an unrewarded ‘C’ item as being 
remembered as a high-value ‘C’ item; Experiment 2). Further, when choosing between two 
unrewarded items where one is indirectly linked to a high-value item and the other is 
indirectly linked to a low-value item (Experiment 3), participants more frequently chose the 
unrewarded item that was indirectly linked to a high-value item following successful 
inference than unsuccessful inference.
These data provide direct experimental support for the idea that a mechanism that flexibly 
retrieves and recombines elements from distinct events in order to make novel connections 
that have not been directly experienced also supports the biased updating of specific value 
representations across distinct contexts, particularly when the original events have only been 
experienced once. More generally, our results add to the growing evidence supporting the 
role of episodic memory processes in novel value-based decision-making (Murty et al., 
2016; Palombo, Keane &Verfaellie, 2015; Schacter et al., 2015; Shohamy & Daw, 2015; 
Wimmer & Büchel, 2016; Wolosin, Zeithamova, & Preston, 2012, 2013).
Flexible Retrieval and Integrative Encoding
As noted in the Introduction, previous research suggests that both integrative encoding 
processes and flexible recombination mechanisms during retrieval play a role in successful 
associative inference (Shohamy & Wagner, 2008; Zeithamova & Preston, 2010). If 
integrative encoding is responsible for false value transfer or biased value-based decision-
making in our current paradigm, then there should be higher false value transfer and 
decision bias scores for successful than unsuccessful inferential retrieval before the 
associative inference test; however, our results revealed such effects only when the value 
memory and decision bias tests were given after the associative inference test. Previous 
research identifying the role of integration during encoding on successful associative 
inference has focused on instances where participants are able to learn the associations over 
multiple repetitions, thus providing participants with more opportunities to bind the 
overlapping AB and BC associations during the encoding phase (Shohamy & Wagner, 2008; 
Zeithamova, Dominick & Preston, 2012). Critically, our paradigm utilizes single-trial 
learning that targets flexible recombination mechanisms during successful inferential 
retrieval (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017). While our results provide evidence for the link 
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

between recombination-related retrieval mechanisms and subsequent false value transfer and 
decision bias, they do not rule out a similar link to integrative encoding under different 
experimental conditions that more strongly target integrative encoding processes. Thus, it is 
possible that under conditions where associations (AB and BC) are learned over multiple 
repetitions during the encoding phase, integrative encoding may contribute to the type of 
false value transfer across distinct events and value-based decision bias that we observed 
here.
Moreover, even under the current set of experimental conditions, it is theoretically possible 
that integrative encoding contributes to, and is perhaps even necessary for, increased false 
value transfer and decision bias for successful associative inference. By this view, false value 
transfer and decision bias scores are increased for successful vs. unsuccessful inferences 
only after the inference test is given because the inference test serves to remind participants 
of a novel connection previously established via integrative encoding; increased false value 
transfer and decision bias for successful inference are not observed prior to the inference test 
because participants “forget” the across-episode link established by integrative encoding and 
require a test-based reminder to retrieve that link. It is well known that test trials can serve as 
powerful promoters of encoding and subsequent retention (Karpicke, 2012; Roediger & 
Karpicke, 2006), and we believe that our findings can be viewed as another example of a 
kind of “testing effect”. However, it is unclear why participants would forget the across-
episode link established by integrative encoding and require a reminder of it during testing. 
Thus, while we cannot rule out that integrative encoding played some role in our key 
findings, we believe that our proposal that flexible recombination during the associative 
inference test produces the observed false value transfer and decision bias effects is more 
parsimonious than an account that seeks to attribute the effects to a combination of 
integrative encoding and test-based reminding. Even though this issue cannot be settled 
definitively, the current results highlight that successful associative inference results in a 
more integrated representation, and that a byproduct of this flexible integration or 
recombination is that elements of one event may be mistakenly bound to the overlapping 
event. This is true whether 1) integration occurs during encoding and is further strengthened 
by the retrieval of the integrated representation, or 2) the recombination occurs specifically 
during retrieval. Nonetheless, future research should attempt to examine the role of 
integrative encoding mechanisms on both subsequent false value transfer and value-based 
decision-making.
More generally, in line with arguments made by Carpenter and Schacter (2017), we do not 
think that the present results should be conceived within a simple encoding-retrieval 
dichotomy. Memory researchers have known for decades that encoding processes involve 
retrieval and vice versa (e.g., Brainerd, Howe, & Desrochers, 1982; Howe, 1988; Schacter, 
2001a). Thus in the present paradigm integrative encoding requires some amount of retrieval 
(i.e., during study of BC, participants retrieve an overlapping AB pair in order to encode an 
integrated ABC representation), and flexible retrieval results in some degree of encoding 
that produces subsequent false value transfer and decision bias. Still, our data reveal clear 
differences in patterns of false value transfer and decision bias before and after the 
associative inference test.
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Implications for Reward-Related Learning
Although we are not aware of any prior studies that have specifically linked successful 
associative inference with false value transfer and value-based decision-making, as noted 
earlier previous research has shown that specific reward-contexts can affect the value 
attributed to unrewarded items that were previously tied to the rewarded item (Wimmer & 
Shohamy, 2012). Importantly, there are several differences between the current experiments 
and previous research by Wimmer and Shohamy (2012). Namely, past research required 
participants to learn the direct relationships between two items implicitly over many 
repeated trials, and thus they were not required to recombine elements in order to infer the 
relationship between two distinct episodes (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). By contrast, in the 
current experiments participants were only exposed to the paired items once and were 
explicitly told to learn both the reward-context (i.e., no-value, low-value or high-value) and 
the direct relationship between two simultaneously presented items (AB or BC). Further, in 
our experiments participants were aware that they would be tested on the indirect 
relationship between ‘A’ and ‘C’, which required them to infer the relationship between the 
two overlapping yet distinct episodes. Thus, while results from Wimmer and Shohamy 
(2012) provide strong support for an additional mechanism that is responsible for the 
updating of value representations during the learning phase, thus bypassing the need for 
effortful recombination at the time of retrieval or decision (for review see Shohamy & Daw, 
2015), the current experiments more specifically target the role of a recombination-related 
retrieval mechanism on subsequent reward-context memory and value-based decision-
making. Accordingly, although our results do not indicate generalization or spreading of the 
reward-context across items in the ABC triad during encoding, they do not preclude the 
possibility that similar patterns of reward-context spreading within and potentially across 
overlapping associations would emerge under experimental conditions more similar to those 
used by Wimmer and Shohamy (2012) (i.e., utilizing an implicit encoding paradigm and 
targeting integrative encoding mechanisms across multiple repetitions). It is likely that the 
explicit encoding instructions and single-trial learning conditions used here are not sufficient 
to support such generalized spreading of reward-contexts because participants are not given 
multiple opportunities to strongly bind the item and its associate to the specific reward-
context.
How does successful inferential retrieval both support the transfer of reward-context across 
event boundaries and bias novel value-based decisions? We suggest that the pattern of results 
found here reflects the operation of two distinct mechanisms: reward-related learning (Murty 
et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016; Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012; Wolosin, Zeithamova & 
Preston, 2012, 2013) and flexible recombination-related retrieval processes (Carpenter & 
Schacter, 2017; Hupbach, Gomez, Hardt, & Nadel, 2007; Schacter & Addis, 2007a, 2007b; 
St. Jacques & Schacter, 2013). Reward-related learning processes allow one to encode the 
relationship between a specific reward-context and a currently cued item, thereby linking a 
specific item to its potential future value (Murty et al., 2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016; 
Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012; Wolosin, Zeithamova & Preston, 2012, 2013). Thus, 
representations of previously experienced events include the specific information identifying 
the reward-context in which the information was encoded, which affects subsequent value-
based decision-making. That is, participants are more likely to choose an option if it was 
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

previously associated (either directly or indirectly) with a positive outcome (Murty et al., 
2016; Wimmer & Büchel, 2016; Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012). Further, previous research 
suggests that the reward-context tied to a previously learned item can spread to an associated 
item, indirectly linking the unrewarded associate to the reward-context itself (Wimmer & 
Shohamy, 2012). Thus, reward-related learning mechanisms may allow for the 
generalization or spreading of value within associative pairs (Wimmer & Shohamy, 2012; 
for a discussion of how this spreading of value affects memory see Loh, Deacon, de Boer, 
Dolan & Duzel, 2016).
However, reward-related learning and the generalization of reward-context within 
associative pairs alone cannot account for the key findings of our experiments – that 
increased false value transfer and implicit decision bias scores were observed for correct 
inference trials, but only when the value memory and decision bias tests were given after the 
associative inference tests. In order for reward-contexts to be transferred across distinct 
event boundaries, our results implicate retrieval-mediated recombination processes where 
elements of both overlapping events (i.e., AB and BC) are reactivated and recombined in 
order to link items ‘A’ and ‘C’ based on their shared relationship with item ‘B.’ That is, 
when people make the correct inference about the relationship between elements from 
overlapping yet distinct episodes (i.e., AC), they may more fully bind the reward-context 
associated with item ‘A’ to their representation of the unrewarded item ‘C.’ Thus, previously 
unrewarded items may gain a positive value simply by way of co-activating and recombining 
elements of previously distinct experiences (for a similar mechanistic account see Carpenter 
& Schacter, 2017, and see Bridge & Voss, 2014a, 2014b, for additional discussion of cross-
episode binding and memory distortion). These findings fit well with previous research 
showing that reactivating and recombining elements of distinct past events in order to 
simulate possible future experiences allows one to link the prospective scenario to 
experienced past and expected future rewards (Benoit, Gilbert & Burgess, 2011; Benoit et 
al., 2014; Schacter, et al., 2015). From this perspective, in our experimental paradigm false 
value transfer and value-based decision bias arise when overlapping AB and BC 
relationships (along with their specific reward-context) are reactivated and flexibly 
recombined in order to encode the novel inference between the previously unrelated ‘A’ and 
‘C’ items. Consistent with our current results, findings from Benoit et al. (2014) suggest that 
integrating elements from distinct autobiographical memories in order to imagine a possible 
future event allows one to process the affective quality of the future episode. Therefore, 
previous evidence supports the ideas that 1) reward-contexts can transfer affective value 
within previously learned associations and 2) simulating potential future episodes allows one 
to link elements of the simulated future episode to a previously experienced reward. The 
present studies add to these findings by providing novel evidence that the same flexible 
recombination mechanisms that support the ability to link together elements from two 
distinct events, such as associative inference, also increases false value transfer of a specific 
reward-context to a previously unrewarded item and further biases novel value-based 
decision-making.
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Additional Implications
While all three experiments reported here focus on recombination-related retrieval processes 
that occurred during the associative inference test for successful inference (AC) trials, 
participants were also tested for AB and BC items that did appear together previously. Thus, 
it is possible that the increases in false value transfer and decision bias scores are linked to 
retrieval of directly learned associations. However, two key features of our data speak 
strongly against this possibility. First, if retrieval of directly learned associations were 
responsible for the increase in false value transfer and decision bias scores, then scores after 
the associative inference test should have been similar for both successful and unsuccessful 
inferential retrieval. Second, if testing of directly learned pairs were responsible for the 
increase in false value transfer and decision bias scores after as compared to before the 
associative inference test, then these effects should have been found for unsuccessful 
inference trials because only triads for which participants were able to remember the directly 
learned associations were included in the subsequent analyses. Importantly, in neither 
experiment did we find significant differences in false value transfer or decision bias scores 
before as compared to after unsuccessful inferential retrieval. Moreover, our previous 
research (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017, Experiment 4) experimentally assessed the effects of 
testing directly learned associations on subsequent recombination-related source memory 
errors by testing the directly learned associations only after both sets of detail and source 
monitoring questions were completed. We still found an increase in source memory errors 
only after successful inferential retrieval, thereby providing evidence that testing of directly 
learned pairs during the associative inference test was not responsible for the increase in 
source memory errors. In sum, in view of the aforementioned evidence from the present 
experiments as well as our earlier work, it is highly unlikely that the current results linking 
successful inferential retrieval to false value transfer and decision bias are attributable to 
direct retrieval of previously studied pairs.
Throughout the current set of experiments we have proposed that flexible recombination 
during retrieval both supports successful inference and allows for the systematic updating of 
value representations that further bias novel value-based choice. Neuroimaging studies have 
implicated the hippocampus in flexible retrieval processes that support associative inference 
(e.g., Zeithamova & Preston, 2010) and constructing episodic simulations of hypothetical 
events based on recombining elements of past experiences (for a recent review, see Schacter, 
Addis, & Szpunar, 2017). In addition, neuroimaging evidence also links the hippocampus 
with the retrieval of the specific reward-context in which the information was originally 
learned, specifically when its activity is coupled with reward-related regions such as the 
ventral tegmental area and the nucleus accumbens (Wolosin et al., 2012, 2013). However, it 
is not currently known what role, if any, the hippocampus or reward-related regions play in 
the kinds of recombination-related false memories and false preferences documented here. 
Future research should attempt to delineate the contributions of the hippocampus and 
reward-related regions in recombination-related retrieval processes that support the 
systematic updating of value representations in memory.
Finally, it should be noted that the current experiments add to the growing body of evidence 
conceptualizing various kinds of memory errors and distortions as products of adaptive 
Page 24
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

cognitive processes (cf., Bridge & Voss, 2014a; Howe, Wilkinson, Garner, & Ball, 2016; 
Hupbach et al., 2007; Lew & Howe, 2017; Schacter, 2001b; Schacter, Guerin, & St. Jacques, 
2011; St. Jacques et al., 2013). Here we have extended the range of such distortions to the 
domain of value-based decision-making. Although we have provided novel evidence linking 
such adaptive processes as retrieval-related recombination and associative inference with 
false value transfer and implicit decision bias, we should point out that similar adaptive 
constructive processes (Schacter, 2012) played an important role in classic studies of 
judgment and decision-making by Tversky and Kahneman (1974). They had the important 
insight that memory-based heuristics that people commonly use under conditions of 
uncertainty “are quite useful, but sometimes they lead to severe and systematic errors” 
(1974, p. 1174). We believe that further investigations of the relations among flexible 
episodic retrieval processes, memory errors and biases, and value-based decision-making are 
likely to yield important new insights into the nature of constructive memory and cognition.
Context of the Research
Over the past decade there has been a large influx of literature that examines how memory-
based processes affect the value associated with a specific event (or related events) and 
further how these memory mechanisms bias participants’ future choices. The ideas for the 
current set of experiments originated as an extension of the authors’ previous work 
evaluating the role of recombination during retrieval on subsequent source memory errors, 
where contextual details of one event are mistakenly bound to an overlapping event 
following successful inferential retrieval (Carpenter & Schacter, 2017). The current set of 
three experiments evaluate whether the reward-context associated with a single event may 
similarly be mistakenly bound to an overlapping event following successful inferential 
retrieval. The findings of the current experiments in concert with the authors’ past work fit 
within a broader research program evaluating the flexibility of the episodic memory system 
and further how such adaptive constructive processes may result in memory error as an 
unintended consequence. The authors plan to extend the current work by utilizing 
neuroimaging (fMRI) techniques to evaluate the neural correlates associated with associative 
inference and false memory. Additionally, the authors plan to utilize the current paradigm to 
examine age-related changes in associative inference and subsequent biases in future value-
based decisions.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by National Institute of Mental Health grant MH060941 and National Institute on 
Aging grant AG08441 to Daniel L. Schacter. We thank Aleea Devitt, Ciara Greene, Helen Jing, and Preston Thakral 
for helpful comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript. Data from the current three experiments are original and 
have not previously been disseminated.
Page 25
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

References
Adcock RA, Thangavel A, Whitfield-Gabrieli S, Knutson B, Gabrieli JD. Reward-motivated learning: 
Mesolimbic activation precedes memory formation. Neuron. 2006; 50:507–517. DOI: 10.1016/
j.neuron.2006.03.036 [PubMed: 16675403] 
Benoit RG, Gilbert SJ, Burgess PW. A neural mechanism mediating the impact of episodic prospection 
on farsighted decisions. Journal of Neuroscience. 2011; 31:6771–6779. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
6559-10.2011 [PubMed: 21543607] 
Benoit RG, Szpunar KK, Schacter DL. Ventromedial prefrontal cortex supports affective future 
simulation by integrating distributed knowledge. PNAS. 2014; 111:16550–16555. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1419274111 [PubMed: 25368170] 
Bornstein AM, Norman KA. Reinstated episodic context guides sampling-based decisions for reward. 
Nature Neuroscience. 2017; 20(7):997–1003. DOI: 10.1038/nn.4573 [PubMed: 28581478] 
Bornstein AM, Khaw MW, Shohamy D, Daw ND. Reminders of past choices bias decisions for reward 
in humans. Nature Communications. 2017; 8:15958.doi: 10.1038/ncomms15958
Boyer P. Evolutionary economics of mental time travel? Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2008; 12:219–
224. DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.03.003 [PubMed: 18468941] 
Brainerd CJ, Howe ML, Desrochers A. The general theory of two-stage learning: A mathematical 
review with illustrations from memory development. Psychological Bulletin. 1982; 91:634–665. 
DOI: 10.1037/0033-2909.91.3.634
Bridge DJ, Voss JL. Hippocampal binding of novel information with dominant memory traces can 
support both memory stability and change. Journal of Neuroscience. 2014a; 34:2203–13. DOI: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3819-13.2014 [PubMed: 24501360] 
Bridge DJ, Voss JL. Active retrieval facilitates across-episode binding by modulating the content of 
memory. Neuropsychologia. 2014b; 63:154–64. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.08.024 
[PubMed: 25173711] 
Carpenter AC, Schacter DL. Flexible retrieval: When true inferences produce false memories. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition. 2017; 43:335–349. DOI: 10.1037/
xlm0000340
Doll BB, Shohamy D, Daw ND. Multiple memory systems as substrates for multiple decision systems. 
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory. 2015; 117:4–13. DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2014.04.014 
[PubMed: 24846190] 
Duncan KD, Shohamy D. Memory states influence value-based decisions. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General. 2016; 145:1420–1426. DOI: 10.1037/xge0000231 [PubMed: 27797556] 
Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program 
for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods. 2007; 39:175–
191. DOI: 10.3758/BF03193146 [PubMed: 17695343] 
Gluth SS, Sommer T, Reiskamp J, Büchel C. Effective connectivity between the hippocampus and 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex controls preferential choices from memory. Neuron. 2015; 
86:1078–1090. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.04.023 [PubMed: 25996135] 
Hennessee JP, Castel AD, Knowlton BJ. Recognizing what matters: Value improves recognition by 
selectively enhancing recollection. Journal of Memory and Language. 2017; 94:195–205. DOI: 
10.1016/j.jml.2016.12.004 [PubMed: 28827894] 
Howe, ML. Measuring memory development in adulthood: A model-based approach to disentangling 
storage-retrieval contributions. In: Howe, ML., Brainerd, CJ., editors. Cognitive development in 
adulthood: Progress in cognitive development research. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1988. p. 
39-64.
Howe ML, Wilkinson S, Garner SR, Ball LJ. On the adaptive function of children’s and adults’ false 
memories. Memory. 2016; 24(8):1062–77. DOI: 10.1080/09658211.2015.1068335 [PubMed: 
26230151] 
Hupbach A, Gomez R, Hardt O, Nadel L. Reconsolidation of episodic memories: A subtle reminder 
triggers integration of new information. Learning and Memory. 2007; 14:47–53. DOI: 10.1101/lm.
365707 [PubMed: 17202429] 
Page 26
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Karpicke JD. Retrieval-Based Learning. Current Directions in Psychological Science. 2012; 21(3):
157–163. DOI: 10.1177/0963721412443552
Lew AR, Howe ML. Out of place, out of mind: Schema-driven false memory effects for object-
location bindings. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 2017; 
43:404–421. DOI: 10.1037/xlm0000317
Loh E, Deacon M, de Boer L, Dolan RJ, Duzel E. Sharing a context with other rewarding events 
increases the probability that neutral events will be recollected. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 
2016; 9:683.doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.00683 [PubMed: 26778998] 
Martinez JE, Mack ML, Gelman BD, Preston AR. Knowledge of social affiliations biases economic 
decisions. PLoS ONE. 2016; 11(7):1–14. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0159918
Murty VP, FeldmanHall O, Hunter LE, Phelps EA, Davachi L. Episodic memories predict adaptive 
value-based decision-making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 2016; 145:548–558. 
DOI: 10.1037/xge0000158 [PubMed: 26999046] 
Palombo JD, Keane MM, Verfaellie M. How does the hippocampus shape decisions? Neurobiology of 
Learning and Memory. 2015; 125:93–97. DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2015.08.005 [PubMed: 26297967] 
Preston AR, Shrager Y, Dudukovic NM, Gabrieli JDE. Hippocampal contribution to the novel use of 
relational information in declarative memory. Hippocampus. 2004; 14:148–52. DOI: 10.1002/hipo.
20009 [PubMed: 15098720] 
Roediger HL, Karpicke JD. Test-enhanced learning: Taking memory tests improves long-term 
retention. Psychological Science. 2006; 17:249–255. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01693.x 
[PubMed: 16507066] 
Schacter, DL. Forgotten ideas, neglected pioneers: Richard Semon and the story of memory. 
Philadelphia: Psychology Press; 2001a. 
Schacter, DL. The seven sins of memory: How the mind forgets and remembers. Boston and New 
York: Houghton Mifflin; 2001b. 
Schacter DL. Adaptive constructive processes and the future of memory. The American Psychologist. 
2012; 67doi: 10.1037/a0029869
Schacter DL, Addis DR. The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: Remembering the past 
and imagining the future. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 
2007a; 362:773–786. DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2087
Schacter DL, Addis DR. The ghosts of past and future. Nature. 2007b; 445:27.doi: 10.1038/445027a 
[PubMed: 17203045] 
Schacter DL, Benoit RG, Szpunar KK. Episodic future thinking: Mechanisms and functions. Current 
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences. 2017; 17:41–50. DOI: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.06.002 [PubMed: 
29130061] 
Schacter DL, Guerin SA, St Jacques PL. Memory distortion: An adaptive perspective. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences. 2011; 15:467–474. DOI: 10.1016/j.tics.2011.08.004 [PubMed: 21908231] 
Schacter DL, Benoit RG, De Brigard F, Szpunar KK. Episodic future thinking and episodic 
counterfactual thinking: Intersections between memory and decisions. Neurobiology of Learning 
and Memory. 2015; 117:14–21. DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.12.008 [PubMed: 24373942] 
Schacter, DL., Addis, DR., Szpunar, KK. Escaping the past: Contributions of the hippocampus to 
future thinking and imagination. In: Hannula, DE., Duff, MC., editors. The hippocampus from 
cells to systems: Structure, connectivity, and functional contributions to memory and flexible 
cognition. New York: Springer; 2017. p. 439-465.
Schlichting ML, Preston AR. Memory integration: Neural mechanisms and implicatioms for behavior. 
Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences. 2015; 1:1–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2014.07.005 
[PubMed: 25750931] 
Shohamy D, Daw ND. Integrating memories to guide decisions. Current Opinion in Behavioral 
Sciences. 2015; 5:85–90. DOI: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2015.08.010
Shohamy D, Wagner AD. Integrating memories in the human brain: Hippocampal-midbrain encoding 
of overlapping events. Neuron. 2008; 60:378–89. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.09.023 [PubMed: 
18957228] 
Page 27
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

St Jacques PL, Olm C, Schacter DL. Neural mechanisms of reactivation-induced updating that enhance 
and distort memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2013; 110:19671–19678. 
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1319630110
St Jacques PL, Schacter DL. Modifying memory: Selectively enhancing and updating personal 
memories for a museum tour by reactivating them. Psychological Science. 2013; 24:537–543. 
DOI: 10.1177/0956797612457377 [PubMed: 23406611] 
Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science. 1974; 
185:1124–1131. DOI: 10.1126/science.185.4157.1124 [PubMed: 17835457] 
Wimmer GE, Büchel C. Reactivation of reward-related patterns from single past episodes supports 
memory-based decision-making. The Journal of Neuroscience. 2016; 36:2868–2880. DOI: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3433-15.2016 [PubMed: 26961943] 
Wimmer GE, Shohamy D. Preference by association: How memory mechanisms in the hippocampus 
bias decisions. Science. 2012; 338:270–273. DOI: 10.1126/science.1223252 [PubMed: 23066083] 
Wolosin SM, Zeithamova D, Preston AR. Reward modulation of hippocampal subfield activation 
during successful associative encoding and retrieval. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 2012; 
24:1532–1547. DOI: 10.1162/jocn_a_00237 [PubMed: 22524296] 
Wolosin SM, Zeithamova D, Preston AR. Distributed hippocampal patterns that discriminate reward 
context are associated with enhanced associative binding. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General. 2013; 142:1246–1276. DOI: 10.1037/a0033609
Zeithamova D, Dominick AL, Preston AR. Hippocampal and ventral medial prefrontal activation 
during retrieval-mediated learning supports novel inference. Neuron. 2012; 75:168–79. DOI: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2012.05.010 [PubMed: 22794270] 
Zeithamova D, Preston AR. Flexible memories: Differential roles for medial temporal lobe and 
prefrontal cortex in cross-episode binding. Journal of Neuroscience. 2010; 30:14676–84. DOI: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3250-10.2010 [PubMed: 21048124] 
Zeithamova D, Schlichting ML, Preston AR. The hippocampus and inferential reasoning: Building 
memories to navigate future decisions. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 2012; 6:70.doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2012.00070 [PubMed: 22470333] 
Page 28
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
Illustration of materials, stimuli, and test displays from Experiments 2 and 3. (A) The 
Session 1 section shows one example of an AB image in which the man is item ‘A’ and the 
toy truck is item ‘B’ and the corresponding BC images in which the boy is item ‘C.’ Only 
the ‘A’ item (man) is identified as a high-value item. (B) The Session 2 section shows the 
Value Memory Test used in Experiment 2 (Experiment 1: 1) Valued Item ($$$), 2) No-Value 
Item and 3) Unsure) and the Decision Bias Test used in Experiment 3. For each value 
memory question participants saw a cutout of an item (A, B or C) presented to the right of 
the question in order to indicate which event the question referred to. In Experiments 1 and 
2, false value transfer occurred when participants chose the specific value (i.e., Experiment 
1: valued; Experiment 2: high- or low-value) that was associated with the ‘A’ (or ‘C’) 
individual and attributed this value to the unrewarded ‘C’ (or ‘A’) individual – as indicated 
by the red (dark grey) circles. True memories occurred when participants correctly indicated 
that the unrewarded ‘C’ individual was indeed a “no-value” item – as indicated by the green 
(light grey) circles. In Experiment 3, participants were instructed to choose between two 
unrewarded ‘C’ items. One of the unrewarded ‘C’ items was indirectly linked to a high-value 
item (i.e., unrewarded high-value) whereas the other item was indirectly linked to a low-
Page 29
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

value item (i.e., unrewarded low-value). False decision bias occurred when participants 
chose the unrewarded high-value item as the “luckier” item meaning this item was more 
likely to lead to a high-value reward at the end of the second session – as indicated by the 
red (dark grey) circle. No decision bias occurred when participants equally chose the 
unrewarded high- and low-value items as the “luckier” item. (C) The green (light grey) 
circles indicate the correct answer for the associative inference and directly learned 
questions. Participants saw these images without the red (dark grey) and green (light grey) 
circles. Panel C of Figure 1 is reprinted from Carpenter, A.C. & Schacter, D.L. (2017). 
Flexible retrieval: When true inferences produce false memories. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory & Cognition, 43(3), 335–349. Reprinted with permission of 
the American Psychological Association.
Page 30
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
Schematic depiction of predicted false value transfer (Experiments 1 and 2) and decision 
bias (Experiment 3) results for each hypothesis. (H1) If flexible recombination during 
retrieval both enhances associative inference performance and increases false value transfer 
(or decision bias), then false value transfer (or decision bias) scores should be higher for 
correct than incorrect inference trials, but only when the value memory (or decision bias) 
test is given after the associative inference test (during which recombination occurs); there 
should be no difference in the proportion of false value transfer (or decision bias) scores for 
correct vs. incorrect inference trials when the value memory test is given before the 
associative inference test. (H2) If integration during encoding supports both successful 
associative inference and increases false value transfer (or decision bias), then false value 
transfer (or decision bias) scores should higher for correct as compared to incorrect 
inference trials when the value memory (or decision bias) tests are given both before and 
after the associative inference test. (H3) If there is no link at all between recombination 
during retrieval or integration during encoding and false value transfer (or decision bias) 
then there should be no difference between the proportion of false value transfer (or decision 
bias) scores for correct and incorrect inference trials regardless of when the value memory 
(or decision bias) tests are given.
Page 31
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
Proportion of false value transfer scores in Experiment 1. Performance on the value memory 
test was examined both before and after either successful or unsuccessful inference. 
were included in this analysis. Results revealed a significant time by inference interaction in 
Experiment 1. Subsequent t-tests confirm that false value transfer scores selectively 
increased only following successful associative inference. Error bars represent ± 1 SEM.
Page 32
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. 
Proportion of true value memory scores in Experiments 1 and 2. Performance on the value 
memory test was examined both before and after either successful or unsuccessful inference. 
were included in this analysis. Error bars represent ± 1 SEM.
Page 33
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. 
Proportion of false value transfer scores in Experiment 2. Performance on the value memory 
test was examined both before and after either successful or unsuccessful inference. 
were included in this analysis. Results revealed a significant time by inference interaction in 
Experiment 2. Subsequent t-tests confirm that false value transfer scores selectively 
increased only following successful associative inference. Error bars represent ± 1 SEM.
Page 34
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. 
Proportion of decision bias scores in Experiment 3. Performance on the decision bias test 
was examined both before and after either successful or unsuccessful inference. Importantly, 
only trials for which participants responded correctly to directly learned trials were included 
in this analysis. Results revealed a significant time by inference interaction in Experiment 3. 
Subsequent t-tests confirm that decision bias scores selectively increased only following 
successful associative inference. Dashed red (light grey) line represents decision bias scores 
at chance levels (0.50). Error bars represent ± 1 SEM.
Page 35
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript