Investigating the Cognitive Correlates of Semantic and 
Perceptual False Memory in Older and Younger Adults: A Multi-
Group Latent Variable Approach
John T. Westa,*, Rebecca L. Wagnera, Ashley Steinkraussb, Nancy A. Dennisa
aDepartment of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
bDepartment of Psychology, Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA
Abstract
Falsely remembering information can have negative consequences for day-to-day functioning 
and can be especially problematic for older adults who often experience higher rates of false 
memory. Because there is considerable variability between older adults in memory and cognition, 
it is essential that we understand the factors that place older individuals at risk for developing 
false memories. Whereas lower frontal functioning has previously been related to false memory 
in general, prior research suggests that there may also be domain-specificity in the factors 
associated with false memory. To test this possibility, 211 young adults and 152 older adults 
completed tasks measuring semantic false memory, perceptual false memory, frontal functioning, 
semantic discrimination, and perceptual discrimination. Factor analyses revealed that – contrary 
to predictions – individual differences in semantic and perceptual false memory were best 
represented by a single, overarching false memory factor. Although cognitive abilities were 
generally not related to false memory when assessed together, semantic discrimination, perceptual 
discrimination, and frontal functioning were all negatively associated with false memory in 
isolation, and jointly predicted 37% of the variance in younger adults and 40% in older adults. 
Importantly, the extent to which these cognitive abilities protected against false memory did 
not differ between older and younger adults. Results suggest that for both older and younger 
adults, individual differences in the tendency to falsely remember information are captured by a 
single overarching construct that has negative (yet redundant) associations with various cognitive 
abilities.
Keywords
False Memory; Aging; Individual Differences
*Corresponding author at: Pennsylvania State University, Moore Building, University Park, PA 16802, johnwest@psu.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review 
of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered 
which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
J Mem Lang. 2025 April ; 142: . doi:10.1016/j.jml.2025.104625.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1 Introduction
Because human memory is imperfect, memory errors are a reality of everyday life. One 
type of memory error that has received considerable empirical attention is false memory, 
where individuals remember events differently than they occurred or remember events that 
never occurred (Roediger & McDermott, 2000). Although false memory is a concern for 
individuals of all ages, they are both increasingly common and problematic for older adults 
(McCabe et al., 2009). Even in the absence of pathological disorders of aging such as 
Alzheimer’s disease, false memories may pose a critical threat to otherwise healthy older 
adults’ independence, safety, and well-being. For instance, older adults may fall victim to 
the harmful effects of false memory when attempting to remember a loved one’s name, or 
whether they have taken an important medication. Given these concerns, it is essential that 
memory researchers understand the factors associated with false memory formation in older 
adults.
Another important consideration is that older adults are not equally susceptible to false 
memory. In light of these individual differences, as well as research demonstrating that 
older adults are more variable in terms of cognition generally speaking (Hertzog, 1985; 
Lindenberger & Oertzen, 2006; Morse, 1993; Nyberg et al., 2012), there is a pressing need 
to identify the factors that make certain older individuals vulnerable to false memories. 
Although prior research has revealed much about the neural and cognitive processes 
underlying false memory in older adults (Dennis et al., 2008, 2014a; for a review, see Devitt 
& Schacter, 2016), relatively little is known about how aging affects the individual-level 
factors associated with false memory. Critically, it is also unknown whether the cognitive 
factors associated with false memory in older adults are the same or different for semantic 
and perceptual content. The goal of the current study was to address this gap by investigating 
the cognitive correlates of false memory across a variety of memory tasks and stimulus 
domains in both older and younger adults.
To date, memory researchers interested in understanding the factors associated with 
individual variation in long-term memory have successfully applied a cognitive correlates 
approach (Pellegrino & Glaser, 1979). Using this approach, researchers collect measures 
of cognitive abilities and memory performance and conduct analyses aimed at uncovering 
sources of individual variability in latent memory constructs. Such research has revealed 
much about the cognitive correlates of long-term memory performance (for a review, see 
Unsworth, 2019). For example, it is now well-established that different tasks measuring 
accurate (i.e., true) memory load onto a common higher-order memory factor (Malmi et 
al., 1979; Nyberg, 1994; Underwood et al., 1978; Unsworth, 2010; Unsworth & Brewer, 
2009). In terms of cognitive correlates, a best-evidence synthesis of the extant literature 
by Unsworth (2019) revealed that memory accuracy is positively associated with cognitive 
abilities such as working memory capacity, fluid intelligence, and attentional control (e.g., 
Brewer & Unsworth, 2012; Robison et al., 2023; Unsworth et al., 2009; Unsworth & 
Spillers, 2010).
Although much is known about the factors associated with individual differences in true 
memory, relatively little is known about individual differences in false memory. Some prior 
West et al.
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

research suggests that – as with true memory – false memory rates on different tasks tend 
to be reliable within individuals (Blair et al., 2002; Ost et al., 2013; Salthouse & Siedlecki, 
2007) and load onto a single latent false memory factor (Ball et al., 2022; Lövdén, 2003; 
Unsworth & Brewer, 2010a). For example, Lövdén (2003) found that false memory rates 
on tasks of category cued recall, recall of omitted critical words belonging to semantically 
related lists (i.e., the DRM paradigm, Roediger & McDermott, 1995), and recognition of 
semantically related images loaded onto a single false memory factor. This study also found 
that individuals high in false memory tended to be low in long-term memory ability (see 
also, Zhu et al., 2010) and inhibition. Similar research has shown that individual differences 
in false memory are negatively associated with factors implicated in frontal functioning (i.e., 
working memory capacity and attentional control, Ball et al., 2022; Butler et al., 2004; Chan 
& McDermott, 2007; Colombel et al., 2016; Gerrie & Garry, 2007; Leding, 2012; Lövdén, 
2003; McCabe et al., 2009; Peters et al., 2006, 2007; Unsworth & Brewer, 2010a, 2010b; 
Watson et al., 2005; for a review, see Festini & Katz, 2021), source monitoring ability (Ball 
et al., 2022; Unsworth & Brewer, 2010a), and perceptual ability (Zhu et al., 2010).
Although such research suggests that individual differences in false memory are associated 
with various cognitive abilities, this is not always found. For example, Salthouse and 
Siedlecki (2007, Experiment 2) measured false recognition for words, faces, and dot 
formations, as well as cognitive abilities such as fluid intelligence, memory ability, and 
perceptual speed in an adult lifespan sample. The authors found that false memory rates 
were not correlated between tasks and were generally unrelated to cognitive abilities. 
These results stand in contrast to the results reviewed above, including studies linking false 
memory to cognitive abilities specifically within older adults (Butler et al., 2004; Chan & 
McDermott, 2007; Colombel et al., 2016; Lövdén, 2003; McCabe et al., 2009).
What might explain these discrepant results? One possibility is that the factors associated 
with false memory may be partially domain-specific, with differences arising between 
false memories for semantic versus perceptual content. This possibility is supported by 
a neuroimaging meta-analysis of young adult data which demonstrated that, regardless 
of memoranda, false memories were associated with activation in frontal-parietal regions, 
including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPCF; Kurkela & Dennis, 2016). This result 
suggests that processes mediated by frontal regions such as failures of retrieval monitoring 
(McDonough et al., 2013; Thomas & McDaniel, 2013) may underly false memory formation 
regardless of the stimulus domain. Critically, this meta-analysis also found evidence of 
activation that was content-specific, such that false memories for semantic content were 
associated with activation in areas including the left inferior and middle frontal gyri, 
whereas false memories for perceptual content were associated with activation in the left 
inferior and middle occipital gyri. Because false memory is thought to be due in part to 
failures to use item-specific (i.e., verbatim) information to differentiate between studied 
and novel items during retrieval (Brainerd & Reyna, 2002), it is possible that these regions 
play an important role in the distinctive representation of semantic and perceptual items 
in memory, respectively. Thus, in addition to domain-general processes such as retrieval 
monitoring, domain-specific processes such as semantic and perceptual discrimination may 
protect against false memory.
West et al.
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Another basis for predicting that false memory is partially domain-specific comes from prior 
research demonstrating dissociations between semantic and perceptual false memories for 
lexical stimuli using the DRM paradigm. As reviewed by Chang and Brainerd (2021), many 
prior studies have investigated the question of whether different processes underly false 
memories on DRM tasks in which lures are semantically related to targets (e.g., doctor as 
a lure for nurse, sick, hospital, etc.) vs DRM tasks in which lures are orthographically (i.e., 
perceptually) similar to targets (e.g., beat as a lure for heat, bet, beat, etc.). In support of 
the proposition that false memories on semantic and perceptual materials tasks are mediated 
by different retrieval processes, Chang and Brainerd highlight evidence that these tasks 
exhibit different developmental trajectories (for review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2012), and 
are differentially influenced by factors such as depth of processing (Chan et al., 2005; 
Thapar & McDermott, 2001), presentation duration (Ballardini et al., 2008; McDermott & 
Watson, 2001) , emotional valence (Howe et al., 2010; Pesta et al., 2001), and presentation 
modality (Gallo et al., 2001; Smith & Hunt, 1998). Taken together, such research suggests 
that semantic and perceptual false memories as measured using lexical DRM tasks are 
governed by different principles.
These results have several implications related to individual differences in false memory. 
First, to the extent that semantic and perceptual false memory depend in part on separate 
processes, it may be that individual differences in semantic and perceptual false memory are 
best understood as two related – but distinct – constructs rather than as a single overarching 
construct. If true, then one’s tendency to experience false memories, as well as the factors 
related to this tendency, may depend on the stimulus domain in question. Such a possibility 
would explain Salthouse and Siedlecki’s (2007, Experiment 2) finding that false memory 
rates from a variety of stimulus categories did not correlate with one another, as well 
as other research which has found that false memory rates for critical words from the 
DRM paradigm are unrelated to the tendency to incorporate suggestive misinformation into 
visually encoded memories (Calvillo & Parong, 2016; Ost et al., 2013; Patihis et al., 2018). 
From a practical standpoint, determining whether individual differences in semantic false 
memory are distinct from individual differences in perceptual false memory is important in 
that such knowledge could be used to inform targeted interventions for individuals deficient 
in factors that protect against false memories for a specific type of stimuli. The current 
study aimed to test these possibilities by identifying the factors associated with semantic and 
perceptual false memory.
Another important consideration is that it is currently unclear whether the cognitive 
correlates of false memory differ across the adult lifespan. Given research demonstrating 
age differences in the neural correlates of false memory (Bowman et al., 2019; Bowman 
& Dennis, 2015; Chamberlain et al., 2022; Dennis et al., 2007, 2008, 2014a; Devitt & 
Schacter, 2016; Tsukiura, 2014) as well as the finding that cognitive abilities tend to be less 
differentiated in older adults (La Fleur et al., 2018, but see Koen & Rugg, 2019), one might 
wonder whether the factors associated with false memory are the same or different in older 
and younger adults. Investigating this issue is both theoretically and practically meaningful, 
as understanding whether there are age differences in the extent to which certain cognitive 
abilities are protective against false memory is critical in determining which deficits should 
West et al.
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

be prioritized as intervention targets when attempting to improve cognitive functioning in 
older adults.
What little research exists regarding the cognitive correlates of false memory in older 
adults suggests that – as with younger adults – older adults with lower frontal functioning 
(Butler et al., 2004; LaVoie et al., 2005; McCabe et al., 2009; Meade et al., 2012; for 
a review, see Devitt & Schacter, 2016) and inhibitory capacity (Colombel et al., 2016; 
Lövdén, 2003) are more susceptible to false memory. Such research suggests consistency 
in the factors associated with false memory between age groups, but does not speak to 
whether the relationship between these factors and false memory differs depending on age. 
In the only study to our knowledge to directly test whether the relationship between false 
memory formation and its cognitive correlates differs between older and younger adults, 
Chan and McDermott (2007) found that age did not moderate the relationship between 
frontal functioning and decreased false memory. Although this result suggests similarity 
between older and younger adults with respect to the factors that protect against false 
memory, because this study did not differentiate between semantic and perceptual false 
memory, it remains possible that the factors associated with false memory in older adults 
differ from those in younger adults in domain-specific ways.
The goal of the current study was to identify the cognitive factors associated with individual 
differences in semantic and perceptual false memory in older and younger adults. To 
this end, participants from both age groups completed multiple tasks assessing semantic 
and perceptual false memory, as well as frontal functioning, semantic discrimination, and 
perceptual discrimination. Based on prior research demonstrating differences in the neural 
bases of semantic and perceptual false memory (Kurkela & Dennis, 2016) as well as 
behavioral research demonstrating that false memories across different stimulus domains 
are sometimes uncorrelated (Calvillo & Parong, 2016; Ost et al., 2013; Patihis et al., 2018; 
Salthouse & Siedlecki, 2007), we predicted that these constructs would be captured by 
related yet distinct individual difference factors. Additionally, we predicted that semantic 
and perceptual false memory would have domain-specific, negative relationships with 
semantic and perceptual discrimination, respectively, which would remain significant after 
controlling for the effects of domain-general processes related to frontal functioning. In 
line with research linking false memory to low levels of frontal functioning (Ball et al., 
2022; Butler et al., 2004; Chan & McDermott, 2007; Colombel et al., 2016; Festini & Katz, 
2021; Gerrie & Garry, 2007; Leding, 2012; Lövdén, 2003; McCabe et al., 2009; Peters 
et al., 2006, 2007; Unsworth & Brewer, 2010a, 2010b; Watson et al., 2005) as well as 
neuroimaging research implicating frontally-mediated processes in the formation of false 
memories regardless of stimulus domain (Kurkela & Dennis, 2016), we predicted that both 
semantic and perceptual false memory would be negatively related to frontal functioning 
above and beyond the effects of semantic and perceptual discrimination. We also tested 
whether the relationship between false memory and its cognitive correlates differed between 
older and younger adults. Because older adults are more susceptible to false memory 
(McCabe et al., 2009) and more variable in their cognition compared to younger adults 
(Hertzog, 1985; Lindenberger & Oertzen, 2006; Morse, 1993; Nyberg et al., 2012), we 
predicted that the protective effects of these cognitive abilities on false memory would be 
stronger in older adults compared to younger adults.
West et al.
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

As a secondary issue, we also investigated age differences in the variability and 
differentiation of our false memory factors. Prior research suggests that, compared 
to younger adults, older adults exhibit greater interindividual variability in cognitive 
performance (Hertzog, 1985; Lindenberger & Oertzen, 2006; Morse, 1993; Nyberg et al., 
2012). For example, Morse et al. (1993), synthesizing individual differences data, found that 
older adults were more variable than younger adults with respect to their reaction times, 
memory, and fluid intelligence. Based on such findings, we predicted that older adults would 
exhibit greater variability than younger adults in semantic and perceptual false memory. 
Additionally, some prior research suggests that that certain cognitive abilities tend to become 
more intercorrelated (i.e., dedifferentiated) in later life. For example, La Fleur et al. (2018) 
analyzed data from 11 cognitive batteries and found that the positive association between 
constructs such as processing speed and mental rotation ability increased linearly with age 
across the adult lifespan (but see Koen & Rugg, 2019). Given these results, we planned to 
investigate age-related dedifferentiation within the context of semantic and perceptual false 
memory, and predicted that these constructs would be more strongly correlated in older 
compared to younger adults.
1 Methods
1.1 Data Availability
The preregistration, materials, data, analysis code, and rendered analysis output for the 
current study are available at https://osf.io/x45ju/.
1.1 Participants
Two-hundred and thirty-four young adults between the ages of 18 and 24 were recruited 
from the psychology department’s participant pool at The Pennsylvania State University. 
Additionally, 165 older adults between the ages of 60 and 89 were recruited from the 
communities surrounding the Pennsylvania State University. Participants were excluded if 
they reported using English for less than half their life (6 younger adults, 2 older adults) or 
if they did not complete both testing visits (17 younger adults). The final dataset included 
211 younger adult participants and 152 older adult participants (see Table 1 for demographic 
information). All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. All participants 
provided written informed consent as approved by The Pennsylvania State Institutional 
Review Board. Young adult participants were compensated for their participation with 
course credit and older adults were paid $45.
As indicated in the preregistration, we initially planned to collect 200 participants per 
age group. This sample size was chosen based on a simulation using pilot data from 58 
older adults in which the simsem R package was used to estimate 80% power based on 
10,000 Monte Carlo simulations assuming a single false memory factor with conservative 
factor loadings (Pornprasertmanit et al., 2016). However, due to logistical issues with data 
collection related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we fell short of this goal for the older adult 
age group. Regardless, our final sample size of 152 older adults and 211 younger adults 
meets recommendations regarding the minimum number of participants needed for structural 
equation modeling in that our multiple-groups analyses well exceed 100 participants per 
West et al.
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

group and both groups have more than 140 participants (i.e., 10 participants for every 
indicator variable; Wang & Wang, 2019).
1.1 Materials, Stimuli, & Task Procedures
1.1.1 Recognition Memory Tasks—There were four recognition memory tasks, 
two of which were predominantly reliant on semantic processing and two which were 
predominantly reliant on perceptual processing. All tasks were created using Psychopy 
(Peirce et al., 2019) and administered using Pavlovia.org. Stimuli across all tasks were 
standardized for size and presented sequentially in the center of the screen. The order 
in which stimuli were presented within all encoding phases was randomized prior to 
data collection, then held constant across all participants. During the encoding phases, 
participants were informed that they were to view items and remember them for a later 
memory test. For the categorical false memory task, object similarity task, and abstract 
images task, the encoding phase was separated into three blocks in which to-be-remembered 
items were presented for two seconds with a one second interstimulus interval (ISI). In these 
tasks, each encoding block was followed by a recognition block. For the schematic memory 
task, the encoding phase was separated into two sequential blocks in which presented scenes 
containing to-be-remembered items were shown for 10 seconds with a one second ISI, 
followed by a single recognition phase.
During the recognition phases, participants were shown items from the encoding phase 
(targets), items that were either semantically or perceptually related to items from encoding 
(lures), and unrelated novel items (foils). Participants were made aware of the presence 
of lures and foils prior to each recognition phase. Across the four memory tasks, items 
presented during the recognition phases were pseudorandomized to ensure that no more than 
four items of a given trial type were presented sequentially. Participants were instructed to 
indicate whether a given item was old or new and indicate to their confidence using the 
following four-response scale: definitely old, probably old, probably new, or definitely new. 
All items during recognition were presented for five seconds with a one second ISI. The key 
indicator of false memory for our individual differences analyses in these tasks was false 
alarm rates for semantically or perceptually related lures as opposed to false memory rates 
for unrelated foils.
Semantic Memory Tasks.: The categorical false memory task is a modified DRM task 
which consisted of 54 categorically-related word lists from Dennis et al. (2007). Each 
list consisted of six words, four of which were presented during the encoding phase 
and the remaining two during recognition as related lures (see Figure 1A). Each block 
of encoding consisted of 72 words separated into 18 categories. Prior to viewing items 
from each category, participants were shown a prompt (e.g., “Types of Fruits”) for one 
second. Following this prompt, the four words associated with the respective category were 
presented one-at-a-time for two seconds (e.g., “banana”, “strawberry”, “apple”, “pear”). 
Presentation order of both the categories and the words within each category were fixed 
across participants. The recognition phase consisted of 270 words, with each category 
having two targets and two lures. The remaining 42 words were novel foils which were not 
related to any presented category.
West et al.
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The schematic memory task was modified from Webb et al. (2016). The encoding phase of 
this task consisted of drawings of 26 complex scenes, split into two sequential blocks, with 
13 scenes presented in each block. Scenes were presented for 10 seconds each, allowing 
the participants to freely study the objects present within the scenes. Objects within the 
scenes were either exclusive or non-exclusive to the scene’s general schema (see Figure 1B). 
An example of a schematic (i.e., schema-exclusive) object would be an image of a toilet 
within a bathroom, as toilets appear only within bathrooms but not within other settings. 
An example of a non-schematic (i.e., schema non-exclusive) object would be an image of 
a mirror within a bathroom scene, as mirrors appear in bathrooms but also appear in other 
settings as well (see Webb et al., 2016 for development and norming of the stimuli). The 
recognition phase was separated into 3 blocks. In total, 96 objects were presented during 
the recognition phase, including 26 schematically related targets, 26 non-schematic targets, 
and 26 schematic lures. The remaining 18 objects consisted of foils, which were unrelated to 
all presented scenes. In addition to ensuring that no more than three objects of a given trial 
type (e.g., targets, lures, and foils) were presented sequentially, items during the recognition 
phase were pseudorandomized to ensure that no two objects associated with a given scene 
appeared consecutively.
Perceptual Memory Tasks.: The object similarity task consisted of 216 images of everyday 
objects from Dennis et al. (2014). Images were separated into 54 image categories, with 
four object exemplars per category (see Figure 1C). The encoding phase was separated into 
three blocks, with each block consisting of 72 object images across 18 categories. Prior to 
viewing a given category, participants were provided with a one-second category prompt 
(e.g., “Types of Bouquets”) that was followed by the sequential presentation of the four 
associated exemplar images. The presentation order of both the categories and exemplars 
within each category was fixed across all participants. A recognition phase followed each 
encoding phase, and consisted of 12 targets, 12 related lures, and 6 unrelated foils. Across 
all three recognition phases, 36 targets, 36 related lures, and 171 novel foils were presented.
The abstract images task consisted of 270 images of abstract art pieces collected from 
Internet searches (Figure 1D). These searches were limited to only include paintings and 
sculptures that had perceptually similar counterparts that could serve as lures. To norm 
selected images, eight participants were individually shown the image pairs and were asked 
to rate each pair for relatedness to one another, image quality, and abstractness using five-
point Likert scales. For the image relatedness, a response of one indicated that the images 
were nothing alike whereas a response of five indicated that the images were similar to one 
another (M = 4.55, SD = 0.74). For image quality, a response of one indicated that image 
quality was poor, whereas a response of five indicated that image quality was good (M = 
4.51, SD = 0.86). For image abstractness, a response of one indicated that the participant 
could generate a label for the image given pair, whereas a response of five indicated that they 
could not generate a label for the image pair (M = 4.67, SD = 0.86). If an image pair fell 
below an average of three across all three scales, the pair was replaced. The encoding phase 
of the abstract images task consisted of 216 images separated into three blocks of 72 images. 
1Due to experimenter error, one novel foil was presented twice during the retrieval phase of the object similarity task. The second 
presentation of this item was removed and was not included in any final analyses.
West et al.
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Following each encoding phase, there was a recognition phase consisting of 36 targets, 36 
perceptually related lures, and 18 foils. Across all three recognition phases all 270 images 
were presented.
No category from a given memory task was used in a different memory task. For example, 
if the category “farm animals” was used in the categorical false memory task, then items 
related to the concept of “farm” were not used in any other memory task. Prior to analyses, 
key responses made during the memory tasks were evaluated to address accidental shifts 
of participants’ hands on the keyboard. Key presses were evaluated by two raters to 
identify responses where a participant shifted within one key of the keys associated with 
the four response options. When both raters agreed that a participant shifted their hand, their 
responses were corrected.
1.1.1 Cognitive Assessments—The administration of all cognitive assessments 
adhered to their respective administration guidelines, including provided instructions, 
scoring guidelines, and adaptive task termination rules when applicable. These procedures 
are briefly reported below.
Frontal Functioning Tasks.: Four cognitive assessments were chosen to evaluate frontal
functioning: the digital, short form of the Berg Card-Sorting Test-64 (pBCST-64; Fox et 
al., 2013) and the arithmetic, backwards digit span, and letter-numbering sequencing from 
the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-IV (WAIS-IV; Wechsler, 2008). Administration of the 
pBCST-64 (Piper et al., 2012) and the three measures from the WAIS-IV (Wechsler, 2008) 
have been validated to capture changes in executive function across the lifespan.
The pBCST-64 was administered via computer using The Psychology Experimental 
Building Language (PEBL; Mueller & Piper, 2014) following standardized task procedure. 
Participants were required to sort a virtual deck of 128 cards according to the color, 
shape, or quantity printed on the card (Berg, 1948). The “sorting rule” was unknown 
to participants throughout the duration of the task and would change after participants 
correctly sorted 10 cards (i.e., one “set”). Participants had to rely solely on trial-by-trial 
feedback to determine the sorting rule. The task continued until the participant either 1) 
sorted all 128 cards regardless of accuracy, or 2) completed nine sets of the task. As such, 
the minimum number of trials a participant could experience if they did not make any 
errors was 90 trials and the maximum number of trials was 128. In the current study, 
younger adult participants completed an average of 122.70 trials (SD = 7.15) and older adult 
participants completed an average of 125.40 trials (SD = 5.72). Participant’s performance 
on the pBCST-64 was calculated as the total number of sorting errors made following a rule 
switch (i.e., “perseverative errors”), with lower values indicating better performance. Due to 
experimenter error, data from seven younger adults and eight older adults were lost.
The arithmetic task consisted of 22 timed mental arithmetic problems. Answers to problems 
were only considered correct if the answer matched the expected answer and were given 
before the time limit was reached. If a participant did not provide an answer before the 
time limit, their mental calculations were not cut off by researchers, but their answers 
were counted as incorrect. The task was terminated once a participant either produced four 
West et al.
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

consecutive incorrect responses or answered all 22 problems. Performance was calculated by 
totaling the number of correct responses. Thus, possible scores on the arithmetic task ranged 
from 0 to 22. Due to experimenter error, data from one younger adult were lost.
The backwards digit span consisted of seven sets of digit sequences that were read aloud 
to participants by the researcher. Following each sequence, participants were instructed to 
repeat the digits in backwards order. Sequences were separated into sets of two trials. The 
task was terminated once a participant either incorrectly repeated both sequences within a 
given set or provided answers to all seven sets. Performance was calculated by totaling the 
number of correct responses. Thus, scores on this task ranged from 0 to 14.
The letter-number sequencing task consisted of seven sets of letter-number sequences that 
were read aloud to participants. At the end of each sequence, participants were instructed to 
repeat the sequence back in a particular order. First, participants were instructed to repeat the 
digits in numerical order, starting with the lowest number. Next, participants were instructed 
to repeat the letters in alphabetical order. Sequences were separated into sets of three trials. 
The task was terminated once a participant either incorrectly repeated all three sequences 
within a given set or provided answers to all seven sets. Performance was calculated by 
totaling the number of correct responses. Thus, scores for the letter-number sequencing task 
ranged from 0 to 21.
Semantic Discrimination Tasks.: The PPVT-4 tested participant’s receptive vocabulary
knowledge (Dunn & Dunn, 2007). This task consisted of 228 trials separated into sets of 
12 trials. Participants aged 18 started the task on trial 145, while participants ages 19 and 
older started on trial 157. On each trial, the researcher read a vocabulary word and presented 
four pictures and participants were instructed to choose the picture that best described the 
vocabulary word. The test began by first identifying a participant’s basal score, which was 
determined based on the first set where a participant was able to answer at least 11 of 
the 12 trials correctly. If the participant answered two or more trials incorrectly within a 
given set, the participant moved to a less difficult set until they answered at least 11 trials 
correctly. Once a participant’s basal score was established, the participant advanced through 
increasingly difficult sets until they incorrectly answered eight trials within a set or reached 
the end of the task. Performance on the PPVT-4 was calculated by subtracting the total 
number of incorrect trials from the last trial number a participant received before the task 
was terminated. Thus, scores on this task ranged from 0 to 228. Due to experimenter error, 
data from five younger adults was lost.
The PPT assessed participants’ ability to derive semantic meaning and relationships from 
pictures (Howard & Patterson, 1992). The 52-trial task was adapted to be administered via 
computer using Qualtrics (Qualtrics, https://www.qualtrics.com). On each trial, participants 
were provided a test image (e.g., a pyramid) and were asked to match the image to 
one of two image responses: a conceptually-related target image (e.g., a palm tree) or a 
conceptually-unrelated distractor image (e.g., a fir tree). All images in the task were simple, 
black-and-white line drawings. Participants were asked to provide an answer to every trial 
but were able to indicate that they did not know the answer to a particular question by 
selecting “Not Sure”. Participants received all 52 trials regardless of task performance. All 
West et al.
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

correct responses were awarded one point and “Not Sure” responses were awarded a half of 
a point. Thus, scores on this task ranged from 0 to 52.
Perceptual Discriminability Assessments.: The MVPT-4 tested participant’s visual
discrimination, spatial relationship discrimination, visual memory, figure-ground 
discriminability, and visual closure perception (Colarusso & Hammill, 2015).The task 
consisted of 45 test trials and eight practice trials. On each trial, participants were shown 
a page with an item and four response options. On each trial, researchers read participants 
a question and participants were expected to choose which response option best answered 
the given question. Participants were shown all 45 test trials regardless of task accuracy. 
Performance on the MVPT was calculated by totaling the number of accurate responses to 
test trials. Thus, scores on this task ranged from 0 to 45.
The (Odd-One-Out) OOO was adapted from four tasks from Barense and colleagues’ (2007) 
perceptual discriminability task: the low ambiguity familiar objects task, high ambiguity 
familiar objects task, the size task, and the color task. These tasks were selected given 
their reliance on perceptual feature discrimination processes (Barense et al., 2007). Tasks 
were presented through Psychopy (Peirce et al., 2019) and Pavlovia.org. The four tasks 
were presented in the following order across all participants: low ambiguity, high ambiguity, 
size, color task. Prior to receiving a given task, participants received three practice trials 
to familiarize themselves with the specific requirements of a given task. For all four OOO 
tasks, participants were shown four images and were instructed to select the image that 
was “different” from the others. In the low and high ambiguity familiar objects tasks, four 
pictures of everyday objects were presented per trial, with the differing object varying in its 
perceptual details compared to the other objects but not in its size or orientation (i.e., the 
“odd” object would not be the exact same object presented smaller or angled differently than 
the other three objects, it would be a new, yet similar object). Ten trials of the low ambiguity 
task were used solely to familiarize participants with the general procedures of the OOO 
tasks and data for this task were not used in our analyses. The high ambiguity task consisted 
of 35 trials where the differing object was highly similar to the three distractor objects. In 
the size task, four rectangles were presented, with the “odd” rectangle differing in size from 
the others. Lastly, in the color task, four colored squares were presented with the differing 
square appearing in a slightly different hue. Unlike the high ambiguity task, the size and 
color OOO tasks consisted of 17 trials. Participants were allowed unlimited time to respond 
to each trial. Performance on the high ambiguity task, the size task, and color OOO task was 
calculated as the proportion of correct responses.
1.1 Experimental Procedures
The current study took place over two sessions, occurring within one week of each 
other. All testing procedures were conducted in-person via computer or paper-and-pencil. 
During the first session, participants provided consent, self-reported demographics, and 
completed the Short Form Health Survey (SF-12;Ware et al., 1996). Older adult participants 
also completed the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; Folstein et al., 1975). Next, 
participants completed a general memory practice test that included example stimuli from 
the four memory tasks they were to complete over the course of the two visits. This 
West et al.
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

practice was provided to allow participants to familiarize themselves with the memory task 
procedures that were common across the four tasks, including presentation time, task phases, 
and recognition response options. Following this practice task, participants completed two 
false memory tasks and four cognitive assessments during their first session. During the 
second session, participants completed the remaining two false memory tasks and cognitive 
assessments.
The order in which the four false memory tasks and cognitive assessments were 
administered was counterbalanced both between and within sessions. The four false memory 
tasks were distributed evenly between the two sessions, with one perceptual and one 
semantic memory task in each session. Administration of the cognitive assessments was 
also segmented, with two frontal functioning assessments occurring during each session. 
Administration of the domain-specific cognitive tasks was grouped, such that semantic and 
perceptual discrimination tasks occurred on separate days.
1.1 Data Analysis
1.1.1 Exclusions and Missing Data—As pre-registered, a participant’s data for a 
given false memory task were excluded from analyses based three criteria: consecutive 
fast responses, low hit rate, and high rates of non-responses (see Table 2). During each 
recognition test, if a participant made six or more consecutive responses in 400 ms or less, 
their data were excluded for that task. If a participant’s hit rate was at or below chance (i.e., 
50%) on a specific memory task, their data were excluded for that task. Finally, data for a 
given task were excluded if a participant failed to respond to over 10% of the recognition 
trials.
1.1.1 Modeling Approach—For all latent variable models, we report several model fit 
indices. Based on existing recommendations (Hu & Bentler, 1999; Kenny, 2020; MacCallum 
et al., 1996), acceptable model fit is indicated by a non-significant chi-squared test,2 TLI and 
CFI values greater than 0.90, and RMSEA and SRMR values below 0.08.
Prior to testing our hypotheses about the structural relationships between our latent factors, 
it was necessary to first establish the appropriate measurement model given our data within 
each age group. We did this by fitting a series of stratified Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
(CFA) models within to the older and younger adult data. Decisions about CFA model 
selection were made primarily on the basis of chi-squared difference tests, which indicate 
whether the fit of a more restrictive model which has been trimmed by eliminating free 
parameter(s) is significantly worse than the fit of a less restrictive nested model which 
retains said parameter(s). Given that chi-squared difference tests evaluate the significance of 
decrements in model fit due to model trimming, a significant chi-squared test indicates 
a preference for the less restrictive model whereas a non-significant chi-squared test 
indicates a preference for the more restrictive and parsimonious model (Kline, 2016). 
However, additional information was also considered as part of the model selection process 
2It should be noted that, being a significance test, the chi-squared test can be significant despite good fit at larger sample sizes, as in 
the current study (Bentler & Bonett, 1980).
West et al.
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

including inter-factor correlations, overall model fit, and suggested model modifications 
(i.e., modification indices).
After establishing the appropriate measurement model for each group using CFA, group 
differences in the relationship between false memory and cognitive ability variables between 
older adults and younger adults were tested using multiple-groups structural equation 
modeling (MG-SEM, Hirschfeld & Brachel, 2019).3 Provided that both groups have the 
same general factor structure, this analysis allows one to test whether various model 
parameters are equivalent between groups (i.e., measurement invariance) by constraining 
these parameters to be equal between groups and testing whether fit decreases substantially 
as a result. Following the recommendations of Hirschfeld and Brachel (2019), our decisions 
about whether to retain the more constrained model were informed by whether the nested 
likelihood ratio test comparing model fit was significant and whether the change in the CFI 
fit index was greater than 0.01, with both of these outcomes indicating worse fit in the more 
constrained model.
We assessed three levels of measurement invariance: configural invariance (where the same 
general factor structure but none of the specific parameters are the same between groups), 
weak invariance (where the configural invariance model is constrained by forcing item 
loadings to be equal), and strong invariance (where the weak invariance model is further 
constrained by forcing intercepts to be equal).4 Importantly, establishing weak invariance 
allows one to test for group differences in latent covariances and regression paths, and 
establishing strong invariance allows one to test for group differences in latent means.
All analyses were conducted using RStudio (Posit team, 2024) and were rendered into 
reproducible research reports using Quarto which are available on the OSF repository 
(Allaire et al., 2024). Structural equation modeling and confirmatory factor analysis were 
carried out using the lavaan R package (Rosseel, 2012). Participants missing data on 
indicators were retained through maximum-likelihood estimation, which enables participants 
with missing data to inform model estimates for indicators for which they have data 
provided that the missing data is assumed to be missing at random (Allison, 2003). 
Additionally, as in Robison et al. (2023) we supplemented several of our frequentist model 
comparisons with exploratory Bayesian analyses. For these Bayesian analyses, Bayes factors 
were computer using the bic_to_bf function in the bayestestR R package (Makowski et al., 
2019), which computes Bayes factors based on differences between models in the Bayesian 
information criterion (BIC). These Bayes factors can be interpreted as the likelihood of one 
model relative to another given their observed BIC values.
3Our use of MG-SEM was not preregistered. However, given that MG-SEM allows one to address important questions about 
differences in latent parameters between groups, we ultimately decided that such analyses were more appropriate given our research 
questions of interest. The decision to use MG-SEM as opposed to the more standard SEM occurred prior to data analysis.
4In addition to configural, weak, and strong measurement invariance, it is also possible to test for strict invariance (where the strong 
invariance model is further constrained by forcing residual variances to be equal between groups). Because strong invariance was not 
established in the current study, we did not pursue strict invariance in any of our analyses.
West et al.
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1 Results
Descriptive statistics and reliability for each task are presented in Tables 3 and 4 for younger 
and older adults, respectively. For each task, we computed odd-even reliability and applied 
a Spearman-Brown correction. False memory reliability was computed for related lure only, 
and was computed following the exclusions described in Table 2.
Correlations for our measured (i.e., manifest) variables are presented in Figures 2–4. 
Generally, the observed pattern of correlations aligns with our hypothesized factor structure 
(Figure 5) in that variables predicted to measure the same latent construct tend to be 
intercorrelated. An exception to this is seen in the correlations between the four false 
memory tasks, which – despite being correlated with one another – do not show specificity 
with respect to our distinction between semantic and perceptual false memory tasks. If it 
were the case that semantic and perceptual false memories were captured by two distinct 
constructs, one would expect semantic false memory tasks to be more highly correlated 
with one another than with perceptual false memory tasks, and vice versa. This prediction 
is not supported by the observed correlations; the highest correlation for our false memory 
measures in both age groups is between the perceptual Object Similarity and semantic 
Categorical False Memory tasks, and Object Similarity false memory is also moderately 
correlated with semantic Schematic false memory.
Following Robison et al. (2023), we conducted exploratory tests of age differences for our 
observed correlations by applying a Fisher’s r-to-z transformation to the correlations in 
each age group and testing group differences using Fisher’s method (1925). Results of this 
analysis are reported in our rendered analysis output: https://osf.io/q46p2. Of the 91 pair-
wise correlations in Figures 2–4, 8 differed significantly between older adults and younger 
adults (smallest p = 0.005). In all cases, these age differences reflected stronger correlations 
between measures in younger adults compared to older adults. However, it is important 
to note that none of these age differences were significant at a Bonferroni-corrected alpha 
threshold of 0.05/91.
1.1 Age Differences in Cognitive Assessments
For the domain-general frontal functioning assessments, there was a significant difference 
in performance between the age groups on the pBCST-64, t(210.35) = 3.87, p < .001, d = 
0.44, with older adults having significantly more perseverative errors than younger adults. 
There was also a significant difference in performance on the arithmetic task, t(334.23) = 
4.87, p < .001, d = 0.52, with older adults performing better than younger adults. There 
was no difference in performance between the age groups on the backwards digit span task, 
t(323.13) = 1.32, p = .19, d = 0.14. Lastly, older adults performed significantly worse on the 
letter-number sequencing task compared to younger adults, t(346.53) = -2.06, p = .04, d = 
0.20.
For the domain-specific discriminability assessments, older adults performed significantly 
better than younger adults in the semantic domain, as captured by the PPVT-4, t(300.25) = 
24.39, p < .001, d = 2.47, and the PPT, t(325.08) = 14.67, p < .001, d = 1.48. In contrast, in 
the perceptual domain assessments younger adults outperformed the older adults on nearly 
West et al.
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

all assessments. In the Odd One Out subtasks, younger adults performed significantly better 
than older adults on the High discriminability subtest, t(326.90) = -4.10, p < .001, d = 0.47, 
and on the Color subtest, t(283.35) = -6.21, p < .001, d = 0.68. On the Size subtest, older 
adults performed significantly better than younger adults, t(359.06) = 2.12, p = .03, d = 0.27. 
Finally, on the MVPT, younger adults, again, performed significantly better than the older 
adults, t(331.25) = -3.49, p < .001, d = 0.37.
1.1 Age Differences in Memory Discriminability
To investigate age differences in memory discriminability, d’ was calculated for each 
memory task as z(Hits) – z(Related False Alarms). Hit rates of 1 were corrected by 
subtracting 0.5 to the hit rate numerator and false alarm rates of 0 were corrected by 
adding 0.5 to the false alarm rate numerator. For the categorical false memory task, older 
adults had better discriminability (M = 2.09, SD = 0.80) than younger adults (M = 1.90, 
SD = 0.95), t(342.48) = 2.05, p = .04, d = 0.22. For the schematic memory task, younger 
adults had better discriminability (M = 0.28, SD = .43) than older adults (M = 0.17, SD = 
.40), t(225.70) = -2.01, p = .045, d = -0.26. In the object similarity task, older adults had 
significantly better discriminability (M = 1.77, SD = 0.58) than younger adults (M = 1.51, 
SD = 0.89), t(347.93) = 3.29, p = .001, d = 0.34. Finally, in the abstract images task, there 
was no significant difference in discriminability between the two age groups, t(348.65) = 
0.98, p = .33, d = 0.10 (younger adults: M = 0.81, SD = 0.66; older adults: M = 0.87, SD = 
0.48).
1.1 Age Differences in False Memory
Four 2 (Age: young adult, older adult) x 2 (Item type: lures, foils) analysis of variance 
(ANOVAs) were conducted to evaluate the effects of age group and item type on the 
production of false memories across the four memory tasks. Including item type as a factor 
in these analyses allowed us to verify that false memory rate differed between lures and 
foils, which was the case for all four memory tests.
Semantic Memory Tasks.—For the categorical false memory task, a significant main 
effect of age group was found, F(1, 349) = 8.13, p = 0.005, ηp2 = 0.023, with older adults’ 
false memory rates (M = 0.12, SD = 0.16) being lower than younger adults’ false memory 
rates (M = 0.16, SD = 0.19). There was also a significant main effect of item type, F(1, 349) 
= 780.488, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.691, with false memory rates for lures (M = 0.26, SD = 0.18) 
being greater than false memory rates for novel foils (M = 0.03, SD = 0.08). The interaction 
effect between age group and item type was not significant, F(1, 349) = 0.914, p = 0.340, 
ηp2 = 0.003.
For the schematic memory task, the main effect of age group was not significant, F(1, 251) 
= 2.51, p = 0.115, ηp2 = 0.010. The main effect of item type was significant, F(1, 251) 
= 454.59, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.644. False memory rates for lures (M = 0.49, SD = 0.15) 
were greater than false memory rates for foils (M = 0.29, SD = 0.17). The interaction effect 
between age group and item type was significant, F(1, 251) = 24.93, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.090. 
Follow-up simple effects tests revealed that this interaction was driven by group differences 
in false memory rates for novel foils, F(1, 251) = 13.57 p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.051, with younger 
West et al.
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

adults’ false memory rates (M = 0.32, SD = 0.17) being greater than older adults’ false 
memory rates (M = 0.25, SD = 0.15) for novel foils. There were no significant differences in 
false memory rates for lure items, F(1, 251) = 1.34, p = 0.287, ηp2 = 0.005, between younger 
(M = 0.48, SD = 0.15) and older (M = 0.50, SD = 0.16) adults.
Perceptual Memory Tasks.—For the object similarity task, the main effect of age group 
was not significant, F(1, 350) = 0.43, p = 0.513, ηp2 = 0.001. The main effect of item type 
was significant, F(1, 350) = 1443.78, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.805, with false memory rates for 
lures (M = 0.39, SD = 0.19) being greater than false memory rates for foils (M = 0.02, SD 
= 0.06). The interaction between age group and item type was not significant, F(1, 350) = 
2.64, p = 0.105, ηp2 = 0.007.
Finally, for the abstract images task, the main effect of age group was marginally significant, 
F(1, 349) = 3.80, p = 0.052, ηp2 = 0.011, as older adults’ false memory rates (M = 0.38, SD 
= 0.25) were greater than younger adults’ false memory rates (M = 0.35, SD = 0.23). The 
main effect of item type was also significant, F(1, 349) = 2715.46, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.886, 
with false memory rates for lures (M = 0.55, SD = 0.15) being greater than false memory 
rates for novel foils (M = 0.17, SD = 0.16). Additionally, the interaction between age group 
and item type was significant, F(1, 349) = 28.18, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.075. Follow-up simple 
effects tests indicated that this interaction was driven by age differences in false memory 
rates for the lure items, F(1, 349) = 18.46, p < 0.001, ηp2 = 0.050, with older adults’ false 
memory rates being greater (M = 0.59, SD = 0.14) than younger adults’ false memory rates 
for lures (M = 0.52, SD = 0.15). There were no differences in false memory rates for novel 
foils, F(1, 349) = 0.42, p = 0.515, ηp2 = 0.001, between younger (M = 0.18, SD = 0.16) and 
older (M = 0.16, SD = 0.15) adults. A summary of results regarding age differences in our 
cognitive assessments and false memory tasks is presented in Table 6.
1.1 Confirmatory Factor Analyses
We began our latent variable analyses by comparing the fit of four potential theory-informed 
factor structures. Model 1 aligned with our preregistered hypotheses in that this model had 
two separate factors for semantic and perceptual false memory and three separate factors for 
cognitive abilities. In addition to testing the fit of this preregistered measurement model, we 
also tested three competing models based on theory which were not preregistered. Model 2 
tested the possibility that false memory is captured by a single, overarching false memory 
factor rather than by two distinct factors but retained the three distinct cognitive ability 
factors. Model 3 tested the possibility that cognitive abilities are best captured by a single 
factor but retained the separate semantic and perceptual false memory factors from Model 1. 
At the suggestion of an anonymous reviewer, we also tested the fit of Model 4, which had a 
single false memory factor and a single cognitive ability factor. Because producing Models 
2–4 entails placing various restrictions on Model 1 (i.e., fixing between-factor correlations 
to be 1), Model 1 is nested within Models 2–4. Models 2 and 3 are nested within Model 4 
for similar reasons. Residual covariances were specified for the three measures taken from 
the odd-one-out to allow these measures to covary with one another above and beyond their 
shared status as indicators of perceptual discrimination. Models 1 and 3 indicated a small 
number of negative variance estimates close to zero for the older adult data. As is often 
West et al.
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

done, these variance estimated were fixed to zero (Farooq, 2022). Path diagrams for the CFA 
models are presented in our rendered output: https://osf.io/erdkf.5
Fit indices for the three CFA models are presented in Table 7. For younger adults, Models 
1 and 2 fit the data well whereas Models 3 and 4 fit the data more poorly. All models 
converged without warnings. Chi-squared difference tests indicated that the more restrictive 
Model 3 fit the data significantly worse than the less restrictive Model 1 [X 2(7) = 61.158, p 
< 0.001]. Model 2, however, did not fit the data significantly worse than Model 1 [X 2(4) = 
7.019, p = 0.135], suggesting that Model 2 is more appropriate than Model 1 for the younger 
adult data. Because Model 4 fit the data significantly worse than Model 2, Model 2 was 
retained as the appropriate model [X 2(5) = 55.696, p < 0.001]. Thus, results suggest that 
Model 2, with a single false memory factor and three separate cognitive ability factors, is the 
measurement model that best describes the younger adult data.
All four models fit the older data well. Chi-squared difference tests indicated that the more 
restrictive Models 2 [X 2(2) = 9.25, p = 0.010] and 3 [X 2(6) = 19.00, p = 0.004] both fit 
the data significantly worse than the less restrictive Model 1. Although these chi-squared 
tests suggest that Model 1 is the appropriate model for the older adult data, there are several 
indications that, as was the case with the younger adult data, the more restrictive Model 
2 which combines the semantic and perceptual false memory factors may also be a viable 
measurement model for the older adult data.
First, the semantic and perceptual false memory factors were highly correlated in Model 
1 (r = 0.803) for the older adult data, suggesting that, even when modeled as separate 
factors, semantic and perceptual false memory exhibit a high degree of overlap. This high 
correlation was also present when estimating the SEM model in Figure 5 for older adults 
(see https://osf.io/erdkf for model results). This SEM assumes the separate semantic and 
perceptual false memory factors of Model 1 and is based on our a priori hypotheses in 
which semantic and perceptual false memory exhibit domain-general and domain-specific 
relationships with cognitive abilities. In this SEM, the semantic and perceptual false memory 
factors are highly correlated (r = 0.806), again, highlighting the overlap of these factors. 
Also consistent with the notion that the two false memory factors had considerable overlap, 
several modification indices suggested making changes to this SEM which hint at overlap 
between these factors (e.g., allowing schematic and object similarity false memory to covary 
[MI = 8.687], allowing schematic false memory to load onto perceptual false memory [MI 
= 6.808], allowing categorical false memory to load onto perceptual false memory [MI = 
4.787]). These same modification suggestions were also present for CFA Model 1 (e.g., 
allowing schematic and object similarity false memory to covary [MI = 8.847], allowing 
schematic false memory to load onto perceptual false memory [MI = 7.264], allowing 
categorical false memory to load onto perceptual false memory [MI = 7.264]). Finally, 
the semantic and perceptual false memory factors from Model 1 had similar relationships 
with the cognitive ability factors for older adults in that both factors were significantly and 
5At the suggestion of a colleague, we also conducted exploratory CFAs investigating the fit of bifactor models, where false memory 
was modeled using a combination of orthogonal domain-general and domain-specific false memory factors (Cucina & Byle, 2017; 
Markon, 2019). Because these models exhibited poor fit and convergence issues, we do not discuss them here. Nonetheless, the results 
of these analyses can be found in our OSF repository: https://osf.io/j5rpk.
West et al.
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

negatively correlated with the three cognitive abilities (r’s between -0.241 and -0.785, p’s < 
0.001 to 0.016). This result suggests that our semantic and perceptual false memory factors 
are interchangeable with respect to their cognitive correlates.
Thus, although chi-squared difference tests indicate that the more restrictive Model 2 fit the 
data worse than the less restrictive Model 1 for the older adult data [X 2(2) = 9.25, p = 
0.010], there is evidence that collapsing the perceptual and semantic false memory factors 
as in Model 2 is warranted, as these factors are highly corelated and have similar cognitive 
correlates. Given these considerations, we chose Model 2 as the measurement model for the 
older adult data. Doing so also had the benefit of allowing us to use MG-SEM analyses to 
test for age differences given that choosing Model 2 for both age groups means that both 
groups have the same underlying factor structure. We return the issue of whether the older 
adult data is best described by one or two false memory factors in the Discussion section.
1.1 Multi-Group Structural Equation Modeling
Having established the measurement model for our data, we next conducted MG-SEM 
analyses to examine age differences the structural relationships between our latent factors. 
In this model, domain-general false memory was predicted as a function of semantic 
discrimination, perceptual discrimination, and frontal functioning. A path diagram of this 
model is presented in Figure 6.
We began by estimating a configural invariance model in which the same general factor 
structure and regression paths were fit to both age groups simultaneously. Fit indices for this 
and other MG-SEM models are presented in Table 8. Because this model fit the data well, 
we concluded configural invariance, indicating that the same general factor structure applies 
to both older adults and younger adults. Next, we tested for weak invariance by constraining 
item loadings to be equal between groups. Because this constraint did not significantly 
reduce fit based on a likelihood ration test [X 2(10) = 11.245, p = 0.339] and resulted in 
a minimal decrease to CFI (CFIdiff = 0.001), we concluded weak invariance. Finally, we 
tested for strong invariance by constraining both the item loadings and intercepts to be equal 
between groups. Because this constraint resulted in a significant reduction in fit [X 2(10) 
= 160.340, p < 0.001] and a large decrease to CFI (CFIdiff = 0.140), we did not conclude 
strong invariance.
Even when the requirements of strong invariance are not met, it is still possible to achieve 
partial strong invariance by releasing the equality constrains for a small number of item 
intercepts (Hirschfeld & Brachel, 2019). To test for this possibility, we conducted both 
frequentist and Bayesian analyses to compare changes in model fit after iteratively equating 
each item intercept. Analyses suggested that suggested that nearly all of the item intercepts 
differed between age groups, making partial strong invariance untenable (see the rendered 
output: https://osf.io/ur64k). Ultimately, the current analyses suggest a pattern of weak 
measurement invariance, whereby the relationship between cognitive abilities and false 
memory is captured by the same general model in older adults and younger adults, with 
similar item loadings but not item intercepts between groups.
West et al.
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Having established weak invariance, we turn now to our interpretation of our final MG-SEM 
model. Path diagrams depicting this model in older adults and younger adults are presented 
in Figures 7 and 8, and scatterplots depicting latent covariances and regression paths as 
estimated by factor scores are presented in Figures 9 and 10. As seen in Figure 9, frontal 
functioning, semantic discrimination, and perceptual discrimination were positively and 
significantly intercorrelated in both older adults and younger adults. Notably, cognitive 
abilities jointly predicted 37.2% of the variance in false memory in older adults and 
40.0% of the variance in younger adults. Regarding the specific effects of these cognitive 
abilities on false memory, only the effect of perceptual discrimination in younger adults was 
significant, with higher perceptual discrimination predicting decreased false memory when 
controlling for semantic discrimination and frontal functioning.
We predicted that cognitive abilities would be negatively related to false memories in 
both older and younger adults but only observed a single significant effect of perceptual 
discrimination on false memory in younger adults. However, inspection of the factor score 
scatterplots in Figure 10 appears to show the expected negative relationship between each 
of these cognitive abilities and false memory. This suggests that although these cognitive 
abilities generally do not have unique relationships with false memory when these effects are 
estimated jointly (perhaps due to some degree of multicollinearity, as correlations between 
the cognitive ability factors ranged from 0.436 to 0.752), we reasoned that these factors 
might predict false memory in isolation. Consistent with this interpretation, exploratory 
analyses indicated that when estimated in models not including the other cognitive abilities, 
frontal functioning (Older adults: β = -0.54, z = -3.21, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.295; Younger 
adults: β = -0.37, z = -3.23, p = 0.001, R2 = 0.139), semantic discrimination (Older adults: 
β = -0.32, z = -2.36, p = 0.018, R2 = 0.099; Younger adults: β = -0.48, z = -3.80, p < 0.001, 
R2 = 0.227) , and perceptual discrimination (Older adults: β = -0.60, z = -3.97, p < 0.001, R2 
= 0.362; Younger adults: β = -0.60, z = -5.07, p < 0.001, R2 = 0.361) were each negatively 
related to false memory in both older adults and younger adults. These results suggest that, 
although frontal functioning, semantic discrimination, and perceptual discrimination do not 
uniquely predict false memory, they are negatively related to false memory when considered 
in isolation of one another.
Next, we conducted analyses to examine whether factor variances and regression paths 
differed between older adults and younger adults. For these analyses, we tested for 
moderation by releasing the equality constraint on a single model parameter one at a time 
and testing whether releasing that constraint resulted in improved fit (see Robison et al., 
2023). Frequentist and Bayesian results (i.e., Bayes factors presented as BF10) of these 
moderation analyses are presented in Table 9.
Testing whether factor variances differed between older and younger adults allowed us to 
test the prediction that older adults would exhibit greater interindividual variability than 
younger adults (Hertzog, 1985; Lindenberger & Oertzen, 2006; Morse, 1993; Nyberg et al., 
2012). Moderation analyses revealed that younger adults were more variable with respect 
to semantic discrimination than older adults (0.400 vs. 0.080; see the Variance Estimates 
section of Table 9). Frequentist analyses suggested that younger adults were also more 
variable with respect to false memory, though Bayesian results for this test were more 
West et al.
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ambiguous (0.557 vs. 0.312). We did not find evidence for age differences in variability in 
terms of frontal functioning or perceptual discrimination.
Given these group differences in variance estimates, moderation tests for covariance 
estimates were not assessed. Instead, we addressed the prediction that older adults would 
exhibit increased cognitive dedifferentiation by inspecting latent correlations. Results 
showed that frontal functioning was more strongly related to semantic discrimination in 
older adults than in younger adults (r = 0.696 vs r = 0.436). Semantic and perceptual 
discrimination were similarly correlated in older and younger adults (r = 0.662 vs r = 0.618), 
as were frontal functioning and perceptual discrimination (r = 0.752 vs r = 0.726).
Finally, we tested for group differences in regression coefficients within both our joint and 
isolated models, which allowed us to determine whether the effects of cognitive abilities on 
false memory differed between older and younger adults. As seen in Table 9, our analyses 
did not provide evidence of moderation, suggesting that the joint and isolated effects of 
cognitive abilities on false memory did not differ between older adults and younger adults.
1 Discussion
The goal of the current study was to investigate the factor structure and cognitive correlates 
of individual differences in semantic and perceptual false memory in younger and older 
adults. To this end, participants completed a series of tasks designed to assess semantic 
false memory, perceptual false memory, frontal functioning, semantic discrimination, and 
perceptual discrimination. Based on research suggesting that the neural processes associated 
with semantic false memory differ from those associated with perceptual false memory 
(Kurkela & Dennis, 2016) as well as research suggesting that false memory tasks from 
different stimulus modalities are uncorrelated (Calvillo & Parong, 2016; Ost et al., 2013; 
Patihis et al., 2018; Salthouse & Siedlecki, 2007), we predicted that measures of semantic 
and perceptual false memory would load onto separate factors which would be negatively 
related to semantic and perceptual discrimination, respectively. Based on prior research (Ball 
et al., 2022; Butler et al., 2004; Chan & McDermott, 2007; Colombel et al., 2016; Festini & 
Katz, 2021; Gerrie & Garry, 2007; Leding, 2012; Lövdén, 2003; McCabe et al., 2009; Peters 
et al., 2006, 2007; Unsworth & Brewer, 2010a, 2010b; Watson et al., 2005), we predicted 
that both types of false memory would be negatively related to frontal functioning. In terms 
of age differences, we predicted that the protective effects of cognitive abilities against false 
memory production would be stronger in older adults, and that older adults would show both 
increased variability and decreased differentiation (i.e., higher intercorrelation) for the false 
memory factors.
1.1 Semantic and Perceptual False Memory are Captured by a Single Overarching Factor
Contrary to our predictions, we did not find convincing evidence that tasks of semantic and 
perceptual false memory loaded onto distinct factors. For younger adults, there was clear 
evidence that these tasks were captured by a single overarching factor, as the model with a 
single false memory factor (Model 2) did not fit worse than the less restrictive model with 
separate semantic and perceptual false memory factors (Model 1). Indeed, in Model 1 these 
factors correlated at r = 0.906. Results regarding the older adult data were more ambiguous, 
West et al.
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with both Models 1 and 2 fitting the data well (see Table 7). For older adults, although a 
chi-squared difference test indicated that Model 2 fit worse than Model 1, the high overlap 
between our semantic and perceptual false memory factors was demonstrated by the high 
correlation of these factors (r = 0.803 in CFA Model 1, r = 0.806 in our hypothesized SEM 
model), modification indices which suggested changes to both models consistent with the 
overlap of these factors (e.g., allowing semantic and perceptual tasks to covary or load onto 
both factors), and the similar pattern of relationships between these factors and cognitive 
abilities.
If one concludes that semantic and perceptual false memory are separate factors based on 
our older adult data, they must concede that these factors were very highly correlated and 
had similar negative correlations with cognitive abilities. In our view, these considerations 
are sufficient to conclude that the two false memory factors are largely redundant with 
respect to their ability to describe the older adult data. Thus, given the clear preference for 
Model 2 in the younger adult data and evidence supporting the overlap of semantic and 
perceptual false memory in older adults, we consider Model 2 to be the most plausible 
explanation of the current data.
Accordingly, our results suggest that although semantic and perceptual false memories 
may differ in certain aspects, such differences may not provide the best characterization 
of individual-level variation in the tendency to falsely remember information. Our results 
are more consistent with the idea that individuals who are prone to falsely remember 
information exhibit this tendency regardless of the stimulus domain in question.6 In light of 
prior neuroimaging research suggesting that false memory has an important domain-general 
component (Kurkela & Dennis, 2016), it is possible that the contribution of frontally-
mediated domain-general processes to false memory, such as failure of retrieval monitoring 
(McDonough et al., 2013; Thomas & McDaniel, 2013), outweighs the contribution of more 
subtle domain-specific processes related to fine-grained stimulus discrimination.
Evidence supporting a model with a single false memory factor as opposed to a model 
with two separate factors was unexpected given prior research suggesting that there are 
differences in the processes mediating semantic and perceptual false memory. For example, 
a meta-analysis of the neural correlates of false memory formation found evidence of 
domain-specificity, with semantic false memory being associated with activation in verbal 
processing regions such as the left middle and inferior frontal gyri and perceptual false 
memory being associated with activation in regions within the visual cortex (Kurkela & 
Dennis, 2016). Additionally, Salthouse and Siedlecki (2007, Experiment 2) conducted a 
large lifespan study (n = 332) and found that, despite sufficient task reliability, false memory 
rates across tasks assessing memory for words, dot formations, and faces did not correlate 
with one another, suggesting that tasks of semantic and perceptual false memory may not be 
measuring the same underlying construct.
6As mentioned in the Introduction, prior research suggests that individual differences in DRM false memory are unrelated to 
individual differences in the misinformation effect (Calvillo & Parong, 2016; Ost et al., 2013; Patihis et al., 2018). Although such 
research is suggestive of the possibility that semantic and perceptual false memories are uncorrelated, it is also possible that other 
differences between the methods of evoking false memories using these two paradigms account for this lack of correlation (for 
example, the fact that these tasks differ in the role of self-generation vs external suggestion; Ost et al., 2013).
West et al.
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Differences between our results and Salthouse and Siedlecki’s (2007, Experiment 2) may 
be due to differences in stimuli used between our studies. Specifically, Salthouse and 
Siedlecki’s perceptual stimuli included dot formations and faces, whereas our study used 
images of everyday objects and abstract art pieces. In addition to differences in the nature 
of our stimuli, our study also differed from Salthouse and Siedlecki’s in how stimuli were 
presented. In our object similarity task, objects were presented alongside a category label 
(e.g., “Types of Guitars”). By providing a semantic label for these stimuli, participants in 
the current study may have been able to organize these perceptual stimuli in a way which 
emphasized their semantic interrelatedness, thus resulting in a stronger correlation between 
false memories on this task and our tasks designed to measure semantic false memory (see 
Figures 2–4). In contrast, the dot formations and faces used by Salthouse and Siedlecki 
did not include semantic or categorical labeling, likely making these stimuli more difficult 
to categorize than our everyday objects. We contend, however, that although the object 
similarity task does indeed have a semantic component in that the task presents participants 
with nameable objects, this task measures perceptual memory in that the ultimate decision 
about whether a given exemplar within a given category (e.g., guitars) is old or new must be 
made on the basis of the visual features of the exemplar itself and cannot be made based on 
object name alone (for studies assessing perceptual memory using similar tasks, see Abe et 
al., 2013; Davidson et al., 2019; Dennis et al., 2012; Gutchess & Schacter, 2012; C. E. L. 
Stark et al., 2023).
Importantly, based on a re-analysis of our data suggested by a reviewer, our conclusion 
that individual differences in false memory are best represented by a single domain-general 
factor holds regardless of fact that the object similarity task contains nameable categories 
of objects. That is, even when excluding this task from our CFA analyses and modeling 
perceptual false memory as a single indicator latent factor (Hayduk & Littvay, 2012; Kline, 
2016, 2018) using just the abstract images task, chi-squared difference tests indicate a 
preference for the model with a single false memory factor based on all three tests over 
separate semantic and perceptual factors for both age groups (see https://osf.io/9rq7c or this 
analysis). Nonetheless, future research should explore this issue further by assessing the 
intercorrelations and factor structure of semantic and perceptual false memory tasks across 
a wider range of stimulus domains while also varying whether explicit category labels are 
provided during encoding. In this respect, it would be particularly fruitful to replicate our 
factor analysis results in a sample which not only completes tasks similar to those used by 
Salthouse and Siedlecki (2007), but also semantic and phonological DRM lists as reviewed 
in our Introduction (Chang & Brainerd, 2021; Sommers & Lewis, 1999).
1.1 Cognitive Abilities Predict Semantic and Perceptual False Memory
Regarding the cognitive correlates of our false memory factor, our results showed that, when 
considered together, cognitive abilities predicted a substantial portion of the variability in 
false memory within both age groups (37% in younger adults and 40% in older adults). 
Such results indicate that adults who score high on tests of cognitive abilities tend to 
be less susceptible to false memory formation regardless of their age group. In terms 
of the nature of these relationships, we found that cognitive abilities generally do not 
have unique associations with false memory (with the exception of a significant, negative 
West et al.
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

effect of perceptual discrimination on false memory for younger but not older adults). 
Importantly, however, exploratory analyses indicated that each of the three cognitive ability 
factors was negatively related to false memory when considered in isolation, with these 
effects being similar in magnitude for both age groups. Taken together, these analyses 
indicate that cognitive abilities have substantial, negative effects on false memory formation, 
but that these effects are redundant with one another in that none of these abilities are 
uniquely associated with false memory when controlling for the other ability constructs. 
Substantively, these results suggest that being high in semantic discrimination, perceptual 
discrimination, or frontal functioning is protective against false memory formation, but 
being high in more than one of these constructs is unlikely to provide further additive 
protection.
The finding that frontal functioning was negatively related to false memory when considered 
in isolation is consistent with a wealth of prior research demonstrating a negative 
relationship between frontal functioning constructs such as working memory capacity and 
false memory (Ball et al., 2022; Butler et al., 2004; Chan & McDermott, 2007; Colombel 
et al., 2016; Festini & Katz, 2021; Gerrie & Garry, 2007; Leding, 2012; Lövdén, 2003; 
McCabe et al., 2009; Peters et al., 2006, 2007; Unsworth & Brewer, 2010a, 2010b; Watson 
et al., 2005) as well as neuroimaging research implicating frontally-mediated processes 
such as failures of retrieval monitoring in false memory formation (for a meta-analysis, 
see Kurkela & Dennis, 2016). Our results are also consistent with research using the 
Mnemonic Similarity Task (MST), a task in which participants are required to discriminate 
between previously presented targets and highly similar novel lures (S. M. Stark et al., 
2013). Similar to the current results, prior research using the MST has demonstrated 
that mnemonic discrimination is related individual differences in both frontal functioning 
(Foster & Giovanello, 2020; Gellersen et al., 2021; Jensen et al., 2023) and to perceptual 
ability (Davidson et al., 2019; Gellersen et al., 2021). Additionally, our finding that 
perceptual discrimination was negatively related to false memory is consistent with research 
demonstrating that false memory is negatively related to perceptual ability (Zhu et al., 
2010). The finding that semantic discrimination was negatively related to false memory is 
also consistent with prior research indicating that having less distinct neural representations 
within brain regions associated with semantic processing is predictive of false memory 
(Chadwick et al., 2016). Collectively, such results suggest that false memory formation 
is due to both domain-general failures of frontally-mediated processes such as retrieval 
monitoring as well as failures to discriminate between information within domain-specific 
stimulus categories.
Generally, our results were more consistent with age similarities than age differences in 
false memory and its cognitive correlates. Because older adults tend to exhibit increased 
false memory (McCabe et al., 2009) and increased cognitive variability relative to younger 
adults (Hertzog, 1985; Lindenberger & Oertzen, 2006; Morse, 1993; Nyberg et al., 2012), 
we predicted that the negative effects of cognitive abilities on false memory would be 
stronger for older compared to younger adults. However, neither the joint nor the isolated 
effects of cognitive abilities on false memory differed between older and younger adults. 
Although the negative effect of perceptual discrimination on false memory was significant 
for younger but not older adults in the model which also included frontal functioning and 
West et al.
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

semantic discrimination, moderation analyses provided evidence against age differences for 
this effect. Our finding that the effects of cognitive abilities on false memory were similar 
for older and younger adults is consistent with the results of Chan and McDermott (2007), 
who likewise found that age did not moderate the relationship between frontal functioning 
and false memory. Substantively, such results suggest that the protective effects of factors 
such as frontal functioning on false memory formation do not differ in magnitude for older 
and younger adults. This may have meaningful implications for our understanding of the 
production of false memory across adulthood. Specifically, results suggest that factors which 
foster cognitive reserve, such as education, may be more influential to false memory than 
age alone.
Our results regarding the impact of cognitive abilities on false memory in older adults 
contribute critical knowledge to our understanding of the factors associated with memory 
errors in later life. Specifically, our factor analysis results suggest that, regardless of age, 
individuals with an increased susceptibility to false memory exhibit this tendency regardless 
of stimulus domain. Additionally, the fact that frontal functioning, semantic discrimination, 
and perceptual discrimination all exhibited negative (albeit redundant) effects on false 
memory in both age groups suggests that any one of these cognitive abilities may be 
promising targets for interventions aimed at reducing false memory formation for both older 
and younger adults. Broadly speaking, the finding that individual differences in cognitive 
abilities predict a substantial portion of the variance in false memory within older adults 
highlights the fact that, rather than being interchangeable in their risk for cognitive decline, 
older adults exhibit important, systematic heterogeneity in their propensity to make memory 
errors. This conclusion dovetails nicely with prior neuroimaging research, which has shown 
that individual differences in false memory rates between older adults correlate with neural 
activity during false memory (Dennis et al., 2014b; Dennis & Turney, 2018; Webb & 
Dennis, 2019)
1.1 Age Differences in False Memory, Interindividual Variability, and Cognitive 
Differentiation
Typically, older adults exhibit higher rates of false memory than younger adults (McCabe et 
al., 2009). Interestingly, the only task in which older adults had higher rates of false memory 
for related lures was the abstract images task. This was the only task that did not include 
any semantic component, nor could participants rely on their prior knowledge during this 
task. In contrast, the other three memory tasks all allowed for some degree of overt semantic 
processing (e.g., category labeling and generation). Thus, it may be that the presence of an 
age-related increase in false memory on the abstract images task is explained by older adults 
being less able to leverage their relatively intact semantic/prior knowledge during this task 
to make discriminations between previously seen targets and novel lures. This explanation 
is consistent with the finding that performance on our semantic discrimination tasks was 
unrelated to false memory during the abstract images task (see Figure 2). Even so, this 
explanation is undermined somewhat by the fact that tasks of semantic discrimination were 
also unrelated to schematic false memory, which one would assume should rely on semantic 
knowledge,7 and the fact that the abstract images task loaded onto the same factor as the 
West et al.
Page 24
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

other three false memory tasks (CFA Model 2 younger adult loading = 0.62, CFA Model 2 
older adult loading = 0.49).
Though not typical, the absence of age differences in false memory is not without precedent. 
For example, Salthouse and Siedlecki found that age was unrelated to false memory in 
two large lifespan samples (2007). Similarly, LaVoie et al. (2005) found that older adults 
without frontal functioning impairment did not differ from younger adults in false memory. 
Additionally, previous work from our own lab using the schematic false memory task 
did not find age differences in false memory (Webb & Dennis, 2019). Importantly, our 
assessment of false memory using multiple different memory tasks highlights the fact that 
age-related increases in false memory are not inevitable, but may instead depend critically 
on task-specific characteristics such as the nature of the studied material and how such 
materials are presented.
Part of our rationale for predicting that the relationship between cognitive abilities and false 
memory would be stronger in older adults relates to the finding that older adults typically 
show increased false memory compared to younger adults. We predicted that, because 
prior research has found that older adults may be more likely to develop false memories, 
the protective effects of cognitive abilities might be especially beneficial in this group in 
comparison to younger adults, for whom false memory may be less of a concern. Because 
we did not find strong evidence of age-related increases in false memory, an important future 
direction will be to replicate the current age by cognitive ability moderation results within 
the context of a sample showing age-related increases in false memory. We note, however, 
that because older and younger adults often differ in the mechanisms by which they carry 
out a given cognitive process even when matched on task performance (Daselaar et al., 
2006; Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008; Webb & Dennis, 2019), our investigation of whether 
the cognitive correlates of false memory are the same or different in older and younger 
adults is still interesting and informative.
As issues of secondary importance, we also tested for age differences in cognitive variability 
and cognitive differentiation. Prior aging research emphasizes the fact that older adults 
tend to be highly variable with respect to their cognition (Hertzog, 1985; Lindenberger & 
Oertzen, 2006; Morse, 1993; Nyberg et al., 2012). Based on such research, we predicted that 
older adults would be more variable in terms of false memory than younger adults. Despite 
this, frequentist analyses demonstrated that younger adults were more variable in false 
memory than older adults (though Bayesian results were ambiguous). Such results suggest 
that although it is sometimes the case that older adults exhibit increased heterogeneity 
compared to younger adults in their cognition, this is not always the case. Future research 
should continue to examine this issue in order to determine whether the phenomenon of 
age-related increases in cognitive heterogeneity does or does not generalize to false memory 
formation.
7Though this lack of correlation may also be an artifact of this task having the lowest reliability of the four memory tasks (younger 
adult reliability = 0.500, older adult reliability = 0.535).
West et al.
Page 25
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We also predicted that older adults would show age-related dedifferentiation (La Fleur et 
al., 2018, but see Koen & Rugg, 2019) with respect to false memory, as indicated by 
a stronger correlation between their semantic and perceptual false memory factors than 
younger adults. Although our decision to model false memory using a single latent factor 
prevented us from addressing this question, we observed some evidence of age-related 
dedifferentiation with respect to our cognitive ability factors in that frontal functioning was 
more strongly associated with semantic discrimination in older compared to younger adults. 
These results suggest that, consistent with prior research, certain cognitive abilities tend to 
be less differentiated in later life.
1.1 Limitations
This study is not without limitations. First, although the reliability of our manifest variables 
was generally within acceptable ranges, there were two notable exceptions: reliability was 
lower for the PPT and for the schematic false memory task. Regarding the PPT, we are 
not the first to report issues related to reliability for this task, as others have reported low 
reliability both in college students (Klein & Buchanan, 2009) and in a Turkish adult lifespan 
sample (Bozdemir & Gurvit, 2022). Regarding our false memory tasks, although three of 
our four tasks exhibited evidence of reliability (odd-even reliability between 0.777 and 
0.911), the schematic false memory task did not (younger adult reliability = 0.500, older 
adult reliability = 0.535). Future research should keep these psychometric limitations in 
mind when selecting and designing tasks intended to assess individual differences in false 
memory.
Another aspect of the schematic false memory task that should be kept in mind is that 
performance on this task was quite low. As such, data from 42 older adults and 53 younger 
adults were excluded based on our a priori exclusion criterion regarding task performance. 
Although this left us with a sufficiently large sample of younger adults with data on this 
task (n = 152) based on recommendations for conducting SEM analyses (Wang & Wang, 
2019), our analyses included schematic false memory data from only 101 older adults. 
Although our sample size for this indicator meets Wang and Wang’s recommendation of 
having at least 100 participants per group, it does not meet their recommendation of having 
10 participants per indicator (n = 140 for the current models). Speculatively, it is possible 
that the low performance on the schematic false memory task relative to the other three false 
memory tasks is explained by the fact that this was the only task that required participants 
to study arrays of multiple items simultaneously, though participants were given additional 
study time with each array in anticipation of this fact. Future research may refine this test 
by adjusting parameters such as the number of items in each array in conjunction with each 
array’s presentation time.
An additional limitation of the current study is that, because older adults performed near 
ceiling on our two semantic discrimination tasks (see https://osf.io/q46p2 for visualizations 
of these distributions), variability on these tasks within this age group was limited. Such 
results are unsurprising considering the wealth of research demonstrating that older adults 
tend to perform similarly or even outperform younger adults on tests of semantic ability 
(Hartshorne & Germine, 2015; Park et al., 2002; Salthouse, 2019; Verhaeghen, 2003). A 
West et al.
Page 26
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

challenge for future research will be to identify appropriate tests which are able to offer 
more precise measures of semantic discrimination for both older and younger adults while 
also ensuring that sufficient variability exists within both groups.
A final limitation of the current study is that we only had two indicators for each of our 
latent false memory factors. It is possible that this fact may explain some of the issues in 
model estimation seen in CFA Models 1 and 3 which had separate semantic and perceptual 
false memory factors (i.e., these models had negative variance estimates for some manifest 
variables). However, this aspect of our design does not explain the fact that our false 
memory factors exhibited high overlap with one another, which we used as the basis for 
selecting Model 2 with its single false memory factor for the older adult data. Nonetheless, 
future research should expand upon this investigation by replicating the current results in a 
sample which completes a larger number of false memory tests per hypothesized factor.
1.1 Conclusions
In conclusion, data from both older and younger adults supports the idea that false 
memory in both semantic and perceptual tasks is best represented as a single false memory 
construct. In terms of cognitive correlates, results showed that frontal functioning, semantic 
discrimination, and perceptual discrimination predicted a substantial portion of the variance 
in false memory, and each had negative, yet redundant, associations with false memory in 
both age groups. Importantly, the relationship between cognitive factors and false memory 
across age groups alongside the absence of age-related increases in false memory in three 
of the four memory tasks highlights the fact that age-related increases in false memory 
are not inevitable. Rather, false memory is dependent on cognitive factors that vary within 
individuals regardless of their age. Collectively, results suggest that these cognitive abilities 
may be promising targets for interventions intended to reduce false memory formation for 
both older and younger adults.
Funding and Acknowledgement
This work was supported by a National Science Foundation Grant (BCS1025709) awarded to NAD. JTW was 
supported by National Institute on Aging Grant T32 AG049676 to The Pennsylvania State University. The authors 
would like to thank Juliet Palumbo, Andrea John, Desiree Meca, and Kai Ludwig for their help with data collection.
Data Availability Statement
The task materials, data, analysis code, and preregistration for the current study are 
available at https://osf.io/x45ju. Rendered output for all analyses are available at https://
fm-sem-analyses.netlify.app/.
References
Abe N, Fujii T, Suzuki M, Ueno A, Shigemune Y, Mugikura S, Takahashi S, & Mori E (2013). 
Encoding- and retrieval-related brain activity underlying false recognition. Neuroscience Research, 
76(4), 240–250. 10.1016/j.neures.2013.05.006 [PubMed: 23726799] 
Allaire JJ, Teague C, Scheidegger C, Xie Y, & Dervieux C (2024). Quarto (Version 1.4) [Computer 
software]. 10.5281/zenodo.5960048
West et al.
Page 27
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Allison PD (2003). Missing data techniques for structural equation modeling. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 112(4), 545–557. 10.1037/0021-843X.112.4.545 [PubMed: 14674868] 
Ball BH, Robison MK, Coulson A, & Brewer GA (2022). Individual differences in disqualifying 
monitoring underlie false recognition of associative and conjunction lures. Memory & Cognition, 
50(4), 751–764. 10.3758/s13421-021-01243-5 [PubMed: 34713420] 
Ballardini N, Yamashita JA, & Wallace WP (2008). Presentation duration and false recall for 
semantic and phonological associates. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 64–71. 10.1016/
j.concog.2007.01.008 [PubMed: 17407823] 
Barense MD, Gaffan D, & Graham KS (2007). The human medial temporal lobe processes 
online representations of complex objects. Neuropsychologia, 45(13), 2963–2974. 10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2007.05.023 [PubMed: 17658561] 
Bentler PM, & Bonett DG (1980). Significance tests and goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance 
structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88(3), 588–606. 10.1037/0033-2909.88.3.588
Berg EA (1948). A simple objective technique for measuring flexibility in thinking. The Journal of 
General Psychology, 39(1), 15–22. 10.1080/00221309.1948.9918159 [PubMed: 18889466] 
Blair IV, Lenton AP, & Hastie R (2002). The reliability of the DRM paradigm as a measure of 
individual differences in false memories. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 590–596. 10.3758/
BF03196317 [PubMed: 12412901] 
Bowman CR, Chamberlain JD, & Dennis NA (2019). Sensory representations supporting memory 
specificity: Age effects on behavioral and neural discriminability. Journal of Neuroscience, 39(12), 
2265–2275. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2022-18.2019 [PubMed: 30655350] 
Bowman CR, & Dennis NA (2015). Age differences in the neural correlates of novelty processing: The 
effects of item-relatedness. Brain Research, 1612, 2–15. 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.08.006 [PubMed: 
25149192] 
Bozdemir M, & Gurvit IH (2022). Normative data for the Turkish version of the pyramids and palm 
trees test. Applied Neuropsychology: Adult, 29(6), 1571–1577. 10.1080/23279095.2021.1900187 
[PubMed: 33789062] 
Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2002). Fuzzy-trace theory and false memory. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 11(5), 164–169. 10.1111/1467-8721.00192
Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2012). Reliability of children’s testimony in the era of developmental 
reversals. Developmental Review, 32(3), 224–267. 10.1016/j.dr.2012.06.008 [PubMed: 23139439] 
Brewer GA, & Unsworth N (2012). Individual differences in the effects of retrieval from long-term 
memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 66(3), 407–415. 10.1016/j.jml.2011.12.009
Butler KM, McDaniel MA, Dornburg CC, Price AL, & Roediger HL (2004). Age differences in 
veridical and false recall are not inevitable: The role of frontal lobe function. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review, 11(5), 921–925. 10.3758/BF03196722 [PubMed: 15732704] 
Calvillo DP, & Parong JA (2016). The misinformation effect is unrelated to the DRM effect with and 
without a DRM warning. Memory, 24(3), 324–333. 10.1080/09658211.2015.1005633 [PubMed: 
25664935] 
Chadwick MJ, Anjum RS, Kumaran D, Schacter DL, Spiers HJ, & Hassabis D (2016). Semantic 
representations in the temporal pole predict false memories. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 113(36), 10180–10185. 10.1073/pnas.1610686113
Chamberlain JD, Bowman CR, & Dennis NA (2022). Age-related differences in encoding-retrieval 
similarity and their relationship to false memory. Neurobiology of Aging, 113, 15–27. 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2022.01.011 [PubMed: 35279564] 
Chan JCK, & McDermott KB (2007). The effects of frontal lobe functioning and age on veridical and 
false recall. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(4), 606–611. 10.3758/BF03196809 [PubMed: 
17972721] 
Chan JCK, McDermott KB, Watson JM, & Gallo DA (2005). The importance of material-processing 
interactions in inducing false memories. Memory & Cognition, 33(3), 389–395. 10.3758/
BF03193057 [PubMed: 16156175] 
Chang M, & Brainerd CJ (2021). Semantic and phonological false memory: A review of theory and 
data. Journal of Memory and Language, 119, 104210. 10.1016/j.jml.2020.104210
West et al.
Page 28
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Colarusso RP, & Hammill DD (2015). Motor-Free Visual Perception Test-4. Academic Therapy 
Publications, Inc.
Colombel F, Tessoulin M, Gilet A-L, & Corson Y (2016). False memories and normal aging: Links 
between inhibitory capacities and monitoring processes. Psychology and Aging, 31(3), 239–248. 
10.1037/pag0000086 [PubMed: 27111523] 
Cucina J, & Byle K (2017). The bifactor model fits better than the higher-order model in more than 
90% of comparisons for mental abilities test batteries. Journal of Intelligence, 5(3), 27. 10.3390/
jintelligence5030027 [PubMed: 31162418] 
Daselaar SM, Fleck MS, Dobbins IG, Madden DJ, & Cabeza R (2006). Effects of healthy aging on 
hippocampal and rhinal memory functions: An event-related fmri study. Cerebral Cortex, 16(12), 
1771–1782. 10.1093/cercor/bhj112 [PubMed: 16421332] 
Davidson PSR, Vidjen P, Trincao-Batra S, & Collin CA (2019). Older adults’ lure discrimination 
difficulties on the mnemonic similarity task are significantly correlated with their visual 
perception. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 74(8), 1298–1307. 10.1093/geronb/gby130
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, & Peterson KM (2014a). Age-related differences in the neural 
correlates mediating false recollection. Neurobiology of Aging, 35(2), 395–407. 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2013.08.019 [PubMed: 24094578] 
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, & Peterson KM (2014b). Age-related differences in the neural 
correlates mediating false recollection. Neurobiology of Aging, 35(2), 395–407. 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2013.08.019 [PubMed: 24094578] 
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, & Vandekar SN (2012). True and phantom recollection: An fMRI 
investigation of similar and distinct neural correlates and connectivity. NeuroImage, 59(3), 2982–
2993. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.09.079 [PubMed: 22001165] 
Dennis NA, Kim H, & Cabeza R (2007). Effects of aging on true and false memory formation: 
An fMRI study. Neuropsychologia, 45(14), 3157–3166. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.07.003 
[PubMed: 17716696] 
Dennis NA, Kim H, & Cabeza R (2008). Age-related differences in brain activity during true and false 
memory retrieval. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(8), 1390–1402. 10.1162/jocn.2008.20096 
[PubMed: 18303982] 
Dennis NA, & Turney IC (2018). The influence of perceptual similarity and individual 
differences on false memories in aging. Neurobiology of Aging, 62, 221–230. 10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2017.10.020 [PubMed: 29190526] 
Devitt AL, & Schacter DL (2016). False memories with age: Neural and cognitive underpinnings. 
Neuropsychologia, 91, 346–359. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.08.030 [PubMed: 27592332] 
Dienes Z (2014). Using Bayes to get the most out of non-significant results. Frontiers in Psychology, 5. 
https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00781
Dunn LM, & Dunn DM (2007). PPVT-4: Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (4th ed.). Pearson.
Farooq R (2022). Heywood cases: Possible causes and solutions. International Journal of Data 
Analysis Techniques and Strategies, 14(1), 79–88. 10.1504/IJDATS.2022.121506
Festini SB, & Katz B (2021). A frontal account of false alarms. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
33(9), 1657–1678. 10.1162/jocn_a_01683 [PubMed: 34375412] 
Fisher RA (1925). Statistical methods for research workers. Oliver and Boyd.
Folstein MF, Folstein SE, & McHugh PR (1975). “Mini-mental state”: A practical method for grading 
the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12(3), 189–198. 
10.1016/0022-3956(75)90026-6 [PubMed: 1202204] 
Foster CM, & Giovanello KS (2020). Domain general processes moderate age-related 
performance differences on the mnemonic similarity task. Memory, 28(4), 528–536. 
10.1080/09658211.2020.1743321 [PubMed: 32204659] 
Fox CJ, Mueller ST, Gray HM, Raber J, & Piper BJ (2013). Evaluation of a short-form of the Berg 
Card Sorting Test. PLoS ONE, 8(5), e63885. 10.1371/journal.pone.0063885 [PubMed: 23691107] 
Gallo DA, McDermott KB, Percer JM, & Roediger HL (2001). Modality effects in false recall and 
false recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(2), 
339–353. 10.1037/0278-7393.27.2.339 [PubMed: 11294436] 
West et al.
Page 29
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Gellersen HM, Trelle AN, Henson RN, & Simons JS (2021). Executive function and high ambiguity 
perceptual discrimination contribute to individual differences in mnemonic discrimination in older 
adults. Cognition, 209, 104556. 10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104556 [PubMed: 33450438] 
Gerrie MP, & Garry M (2007). Individual differences in working memory capacity affect false 
memories for missing aspects of events. Memory, 15(5), 561–571. 10.1080/09658210701391634 
[PubMed: 17613798] 
Gutchess AH, & Schacter DL (2012). The neural correlates of gist-based true and false recognition. 
NeuroImage, 59(4), 3418–3426. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.078 [PubMed: 22155331] 
Hartshorne JK, & Germine LT (2015). When Does Cognitive Functioning Peak? The Asynchronous 
Rise and Fall of Different Cognitive Abilities Across the Life Span. Psychological Science, 26(4), 
433–443. 10.1177/0956797614567339 [PubMed: 25770099] 
Hayduk LA, & Littvay L (2012). Should researchers use single indicators, best indicators, or multiple 
indicators in structural equation models? BMC Medical Research Methodology, 12(1), 159. 
10.1186/1471-2288-12-159 [PubMed: 23088287] 
Hertzog C (1985). An individual differences perspective: Implications for cognitive research in 
gerontology. Research on Aging, 7(1), 7–45. 10.1177/0164027585007001002 [PubMed: 3903892] 
Hirschfeld G, & Brachel R von. (2019). Improving Multiple-Group confirmatory factor analysis 
in R – A tutorial in measurement invariance with continuous and ordinal indicators. Practical 
Assessment, Research, and Evaluation, 19(1). 10.7275/qazy-2946
Howard D, & Patterson K (1992). The Pyramids and Palm Trees Test. Pearson.
Howe ML, Candel I, Otgaar H, Malone C, & Wimmer MC (2010). Valence and the 
development of immediate and long-term false memory illusions. Memory, 18(1), 58–75. 
10.1080/09658210903476514 [PubMed: 20391177] 
Hu L, & Bentler PM (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structure analysis: 
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary 
Journal, 6(1), 1–55. 10.1080/10705519909540118
Jensen A, Karpov G, Collin CA, & Davidson PSR (2023). Executive function predicts older adults’ 
lure discrimination difficulties on the mnemonic similarity task. The Journals of Gerontology: 
Series B, 78(10), 1642–1650. 10.1093/geronb/gbad091
Kenny DA (2020). SEM: Measuring model fit. https://davidakenny.net/cm/fit.htm
Klein LA, & Buchanan JA (2009). Psychometric properties of the pyramids and palm 
trees test. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 31(7), 803–808. 
10.1080/13803390802508926 [PubMed: 19142771] 
Kline RB (2016). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. Guilford Publications.
Kline RB (2018). Response to Leslie Hayduk’s review of Principles and Practice of Structural 
Equation Modeling, 4th edition. Canadian Studies in Population [ARCHIVES], 45(3–4), Article 
3–4. 10.25336/csp29418
Koen JD, & Rugg MD (2019). Neural dedifferentiation in the aging brain. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 23(7), 547–559. 10.1016/j.tics.2019.04.012 [PubMed: 31174975] 
Kurkela KA, & Dennis NA (2016). Event-related fMRI studies of false memory: An 
Activation Likelihood Estimation meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia, 81, 149–167. 10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2015.12.006 [PubMed: 26683385] 
La Fleur C-G, Meyer JM, & Dodson C (2018). Exploring dedifferentiation across the adult lifespan. 
Psychology and Aging, 33(5), 855–870. 10.1037/pag.0000274 [PubMed: 30091632] 
LaVoie DJ, Willoughby L, & Faulkner K (2005). Frontal lobe dysfunction and false 
memory susceptibility in older adults. Experimental Aging Research, 32(1), 1–21. 
10.1080/01902140500325023
Leding JK (2012). Working memory predicts the rejection of false memories. Memory, 20(3), 217–
223. 10.1080/09658211.2011.653373 [PubMed: 22292532] 
Lindenberger U, & Oertzen T von. (2006). Variability in cognitive aging: From taxonomy to theory. 
In Bialystok E & Craik FIM (Eds.), Lifespan Cognition: Mechanisms of Change (pp. 297–314). 
Oxford University Press. 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195169539.003.0021
West et al.
Page 30
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Lövdén M (2003). The episodic memory and inhibition accounts of age-related increases in false 
memories: A consistency check. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(2), 268–283. 10.1016/
S0749-596X(03)00069-X
MacCallum RC, Browne MW, & Sugawara HM (1996). Power analysis and determination 
of sample size for covariance structure modeling. Psychological Methods, 1(2), 130–149. 
10.1037/1082-989X.1.2.130
Makowski D, Ben-Shachar MS, & Lüdecke D (2019). bayestestR: Describing effects and their 
uncertainty, existence and significance within the Bayesian framework. Journal of Open Source 
Software, 4(40), 1541. 10.21105/joss.01541
Malmi RA, Underwood BJ, & Carroll JB (1979). The interrelationships among some associative 
learning tasks. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 13(3), 121–123. 10.3758/BF03335032
Markon KE (2019). Bifactor and hierarchical models: Specification, inference, and interpretation. 
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 15(Volume 15, 2019), 51–69. 10.1146/annurev-
clinpsy-050718-095522
McCabe DP, Roediger HL, McDaniel MA, & Balota DA (2009). Aging reduces veridical 
remembering but increases false remembering: Neuropsychological test correlates of remember–
know judgments. Neuropsychologia, 47(11), 2164–2173. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.11.025 
[PubMed: 19100756] 
McDermott KB, & Watson JM (2001). The Rise and Fall of False Recall: The Impact of Presentation 
Duration. Journal of Memory and Language, 45(1), 160–176. 10.1006/jmla.2000.2771
McDonough IM, Wong JT, & Gallo DA (2013). Age-related differences in prefrontal cortex activity 
during retrieval monitoring: Testing the compensation and dysfunction accounts. Cerebral Cortex, 
23(5), 1049–1060. 10.1093/cercor/bhs064 [PubMed: 22510532] 
Meade ML, Geraci LD, & Roediger HL (2012). Neuropsychological status in older adults influences 
susceptibility to false memories. The American Journal of Psychology, 125(4), 449–467. 10.5406/
amerjpsyc.125.4.0449 [PubMed: 23350303] 
Morse CK (1993). Does variability increase with age? An archival study of cognitive measures. 
Psychology and Aging, 8(2), 156–164. 10.1037/0882-7974.8.2.156 [PubMed: 8323720] 
Mueller ST, & Piper BJ (2014). The Psychology Experiment Building Language (PEBL) and PEBL 
Test Battery. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 222, 250–259. 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.10.024 
[PubMed: 24269254] 
Nyberg L (1994). A structural equation modeling approach to the multiple memory systems 
question. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20(2), 485–491. 
10.1037/0278-7393.20.2.485
Nyberg L, Lövdén M, Riklund K, Lindenberger U, & Bäckman L (2012). Memory aging and brain 
maintenance. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(5), 292–305. 10.1016/j.tics.2012.04.005 [PubMed: 
22542563] 
Ost J, Blank H, Davies J, Jones G, Lambert K, & Salmon K (2013). False memory ≠ false memory: 
DRM errors are unrelated to the misinformation effect. PLoS ONE, 8(4), e57939. 10.1371/
journal.pone.0057939 [PubMed: 23573186] 
Park DC, Lautenschlager G, Hedden T, Davidson NS, Smith AD, & Smith PK (2002). Models of 
visuospatial and verbal memory across the adult life span. Psychology and Aging, 17(2), 299–320. 
10.1037/0882-7974.17.2.299 [PubMed: 12061414] 
Patihis L, Frenda SJ, & Loftus EF (2018). False memory tasks do not reliably predict other false 
memories. Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 5(2), 140–160. 10.1037/
cns0000147
Peirce J, Gray JR, Simpson S, MacAskill M, Höchenberger R, Sogo H, Kastman E, & Lindeløv 
JK (2019). PsychoPy2: Experiments in behavior made easy. Behavior Research Methods, 51(1), 
195–203. 10.3758/s13428-018-01193-y [PubMed: 30734206] 
Pellegrino JW, & Glaser R (1979). Cognitive correlates and components in the analysis of individual 
differences. Intelligence, 3(3), 187–215. 10.1016/0160-2896(79)90017-5
Pesta BJ, Murphy MD, & Sanders RE (2001). Are emotionally charged lures immune to false 
memory? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(2), 328–
338. 10.1037/0278-7393.27.2.328 [PubMed: 11294435] 
West et al.
Page 31
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Peters MJV, Jelicic M, Haas N, & Merckelbach H (2006). Mild executive dysfunctions in 
undergraduates are related to recollecting words never presented. International Journal of 
Neuroscience, 116(9), 1065–1077. 10.1080/00207450600808768 [PubMed: 16861169] 
Peters MJV, Jelicic M, Verbeek H, & Merckelbach H (2007). Poor working memory 
predicts false memories. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 19(2), 213–232. 
10.1080/09541440600760396
Piper BJ, Li V, Eiwaz MA, Kobel YV, Benice TS, Chu AM, Olsen RHJ, Rice DZ, Gray HM, & 
Mueller ST (2012). Executive function on the Psychology Experiment Building Language tests. 
Behavior Research Methods, 44(1), 110–123. 10.3758/s13428-011-0096-6 [PubMed: 21534005] 
Pornprasertmanit S, Miller P, Schoemann A, Quick C, Jorgensen T, & Pornprasertmanit MS (2016). 
Package “simsem” [Computer software]. https://cran.r-project/
Posit team. (2024). Rstudio: Integrated development environment for R [Computer software]. Posit 
Software, PBC. http://www.posit.co/
Qualtrics. (2024). Qualtrics [Computer software]. Qualtrics. https://www.qualtrics.com/
Reuter-Lorenz PA, & Cappell KA (2008). Neurocognitive aging and the compensation hypothesis. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17(3), 177–182. 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00570.x
Robison MK, Celaya X, Ball BH, & Brewer GA (2023). Task sequencing does not systematically 
affect the factor structure of cognitive abilities. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 10.3758/
s13423-023-02369-0
Roediger HL, & McDermott KB (1995). Creating false memories: Remembering words not presented 
in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(4), 803–814. 
10.1037/0278-7393.21.4.803
Roediger HL, & McDermott KB (2000). Tricks of memory. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 9(4), 123–127. 10.1111/1467-8721.00075
Rosseel Y (2012). lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of Statistical 
Software, 48, 1–36. 10.18637/jss.v048.i02
Salthouse TA (2019). Trajectories of normal cognitive aging. Psychology and Aging, 34(1), 17–24. 
10.1037/pag0000288 [PubMed: 30211596] 
Salthouse TA, & Siedlecki KL (2007). An individual difference analysis of false recognition. The 
American Journal of Psychology, 120(3), 429–458. 10.2307/20445413 [PubMed: 17892087] 
Smith RE, & Hunt RR (1998). Presentation modality affects false memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 5(4), 710–715. 10.3758/BF03208850
Sommers MS, & Lewis BP (1999). Who really lives next door: Creating false memories 
with phonological neighbors. Journal of Memory and Language, 40(1), 83–108. 10.1006/
jmla.1998.2614
Stark CEL, Noche JA, Ebersberger JR, Mayer L, & Stark SM (2023). Optimizing the mnemonic 
similarity task for efficient, widespread use. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 17. 10.3389/
fnbeh.2023.1080366
Stark SM, Yassa MA, Lacy JW, & Stark CEL (2013). A task to assess behavioral pattern separation 
(BPS) in humans: Data from healthy aging and mild cognitive impairment. Neuropsychologia, 
51(12), 2442–2449. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.12.014 [PubMed: 23313292] 
Thapar A, & McDermott KB (2001). False recall and false recognition induced by presentation of 
associated words: Effects of retention interval and level of processing. Memory & Cognition, 
29(3), 424–432. 10.3758/BF03196393 [PubMed: 11407419] 
Thomas AK, & McDaniel MA (2013). The interaction between frontal functioning and encoding 
processes in reducing false memories. Aging, Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 20(4), 443–470. 
10.1080/13825585.2012.736468
Tsukiura T (2014). Neural correlates of remembering false memories in young and older adults: A 
brief review of fMRI studies. The Journal of Physical Fitness and Sports Medicine, 3(2), 155–
161. 10.7600/jpfsm.3.155
Underwood BJ, Boruch RF, & Malmi RA (1978). Composition of episodic memory. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 107(4), 393–419. 10.1037/0096-3445.107.4.393
West et al.
Page 32
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Unsworth N (2010). On the division of working memory and long-term memory and their 
relation to intelligence: A latent variable approach. Acta Psychologica, 134(1), 16–28. 10.1016/
j.actpsy.2009.11.010 [PubMed: 20022311] 
Unsworth N (2019). Individual differences in long-term memory. Psychological Bulletin, 145(1), 79–
139. 10.1037/bul0000176 [PubMed: 30596433] 
Unsworth N, & Brewer GA (2009). Examining the relationships among item recognition, source 
recognition, and recall from an individual differences perspective. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(6), 1578–1585. 10.1037/a0017255 [PubMed: 
19857028] 
Unsworth N, & Brewer GA (2010a). Individual differences in false recall: A latent variable analysis. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 62(1), 19–34. 10.1016/j.jml.2009.08.002
Unsworth N, & Brewer GA (2010b). Variation in working memory capacity and intrusions: 
Differences in generation or editing? European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 22(6), 990–
1000. 10.1080/09541440903175086
Unsworth N, Brewer GA, & Spillers GJ (2009). There’s more to the working memory capacity—Fluid 
intelligence relationship than just secondary memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(5), 
931–937. 10.3758/PBR.16.5.931 [PubMed: 19815801] 
Unsworth N, & Spillers GJ (2010). Working memory capacity: Attention control, secondary memory, 
or both? A direct test of the dual-component model. Journal of Memory and Language, 62(4), 
392–406. 10.1016/j.jml.2010.02.001
Verhaeghen P (2003). Aging and vocabulary score: A meta-analysis. Psychology and Aging, 18(2), 
332–339. 10.1037/0882-7974.18.2.332 [PubMed: 12825780] 
Wang J, & Wang X (2019). Structural equation modeling: Applications using Mplus. John Wiley & 
Sons.
Ware J, Kosinski M, & Keller S (1996). A 12-item short-form health survey: Construction 
of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical Care, 34(3), 220–233. 
10.1097/00005650-199603000-00003 [PubMed: 8628042] 
Watson JM, Bunting MF, Poole BJ, & Conway ARA (2005). Individual differences in susceptibility 
to false memory in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(1), 76–85. 10.1037/0278-7393.31.1.76 
[PubMed: 15641906] 
Webb CE, & Dennis NA (2019). Differentiating true and false schematic memories in older adults. The 
Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 74(7), 1111–1120. 10.1093/geronb/gby011
Webb CE, Turney IC, & Dennis NA (2016). What’s the gist? The influence of schemas on the 
neural correlates underlying true and false memories. Neuropsychologia, 93, 61–75. 10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2016.09.023 [PubMed: 27697593] 
Wechsler D (2008). Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-IV (4th ed.). Pearson.
Zhu B, Chen C, Loftus EF, Lin C, He Q, Chen C, Li H, Xue G, Lu Z, & Dong Q (2010). Individual 
differences in false memory from misinformation: Cognitive factors. Memory, 18(5), 543–555. 
10.1080/09658211.2010.487051 [PubMed: 20623420] 
West et al.
Page 33
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Highlights
•
Semantic and perceptual false memory load onto a single false memory factor
•
Cognitive abilities protect against false memory for both older and younger 
adults
•
The protective effects of cognitive abilities are redundant with one another
West et al.
Page 34
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Examples of the Encoding and Recognition Items for the Categorical False Memory 
(A), Schematic Memory (B), Object Similarity (C), and Abstract Images (D) Tasks.
Note. For the abstract images task, we have provided both example target and lure items 
which correspond to the abstract image presented during encoding for demonstration 
purposes only. In reality, a given image presented during encoding for this task was only 
ever matched to either a target repetition or a perceptually similar lure during the recognition 
phase.
West et al.
Page 35
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Correlations of Measured Variables in the Full Sample.
*** p < 0.001.
West et al.
Page 36
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Correlations of Measured Variables in Older Adults.
*** p < 0.001.
West et al.
Page 37
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Correlations of Measured Variables in Younger Adults.
*** p < 0.001.
West et al.
Page 38
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Path Diagram Depicting A Priori Hypotheses.
West et al.
Page 39
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Path Diagram of the MG-SEM Model.
West et al.
Page 40
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Path Diagram of Final MG-SEM in Older Adults.
Note. All parameters are standardized. Significance is not calculated for the loading 
associated with the first indicator of each factor, as these indicators have fixed 
unstandardized values of 1 for the purpose of model identification. * p < 0.05. ** p < 
0.01. *** p < 0.001.
West et al.
Page 41
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 8. Path Diagram of Final MG-SEM in Younger Adults.
Note. All parameters are standardized. Significance is not calculated for the loading 
associated with the first indicator of each factor, as these indicators have fixed 
unstandardized values of 1 for the purpose of model identification. * p < 0.05. ** p < 
0.01. *** p < 0.001.
West et al.
Page 42
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 9. Scatterplots of Latent Factor Score Covariances.
West et al.
Page 43
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 10. Scatterplots of Latent Factor Score Regression Paths.
West et al.
Page 44
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 45
Table 1
Participants Demographics by Age Groups.
Young Adults (N = 211)
Older Adults(N = 152)
Age; Mean (SD)
18.89 (1.09), Range: (18–24)
72.91 (6.00), Range: (60–89)
Education (years); Mean(SD)
12.61 (0.96)
16.72 (2.61)
MMSE
–
29.59 (0.71)
Sex
 Female
143
101
 Male
67
51
 Non-binary
1
0
Race
 Asian
34
0
 Black or African American
9
2
 White
148
144
 More than one race
15
1
 Other, unknown, or prefer not to answer
5
5
Ethnicity
 Hispanic or Latino
20
1
 Not Hispanic or Latino
186
144
 Other, unknown, or prefer not to answer
5
7
Note. MMSE = Mini Mental State Examination

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 46
Table 2.
Data Removed from Each False Memory Task by Age Group.
Young Adult Excluded
Older Adult Excluded
2
0
Low Hit Rate
6
1
0
1
Total
8
2
3
0
Low Hit Rate
53
42
0
4
Total
56
46
1
0
Low Hit Rate
4
1
0
1
Total
5
2
Abstract Images Task
1
0
Low Hit Rate
7
1
1
0
Total
9
1

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 47
Table 3.
Descriptive Statistics and Reliability in the Younger Adult Sample.
Measure
n
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurtosis
Reliability
False Memory Tasks
203
0.27
0.19
0.82
0.02
0.911
152
0.48
0.15
−0.04
−0.48
0.500
205
0.38
0.20
0.43
−0.33
0.884
Abstract Image Task
201
0.52
0.15
−0.15
−0.44
0.777
Letter-Number Sequencing
211
10.70
2.93
−0.35
1.30
0.797
Backwards Digit Span
211
7.29
2.26
0.54
0.01
0.817
Arithmetic
210
9.09
3.54
−0.15
−0.96
0.848
pBCST perseverative errors
206
15.71
9.29
1.32
2.05
0.765
PPVT-4
206
195.51
12.67
−0.41
−0.19
0.914
PPT
211
47.07
2.83
1.02
0.19
0.640
MVPTOOO (High)
211
0.63
0.19
−0.52
−0.49
0.845
OOO (Color)
211
0.80
0.16
−1.22
1.89
0.682
OOO (Size)
211
0.58
0.21
−0.10
−0.78
0.730
Motor-free Visual Perception Task, OOO = Odd One Out task (high discriminability, color, and size components). Descriptive statistics for the false 
memory tasks reflect false recognition of related lures.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 48
Table 4.
Descriptive Statistics and Reliability in the Older Adult Sample.
Measure
n
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurtosis
Reliability
False Memory Tasks
148
0.23
0.16
1.01
0.56
0.884
101
0.50
0.16
0.17
−0.01
0.535
147
0.39
0.17
0.51
−0.15
0.849
Abstract Image Task
150
0.59
0.14
−0.20
−0.37
0.780
Letter-Number Sequencing
152
10.10
2.93
−0.10
1.30
0.792
Backwards Digit Span
152
7.61
2.28
0.10
−0.25
0.815
Arithmetic
152
10.88
3.37
−0.42
−0.83
0.883
pBCST perseverative errors
144
19.87
11.61
0.62
−0.05
0.914
PPVT-4
152
219.75
5.63
−1.36
2.19
0.856
PPT
152
50.38
1.40
−1.60
4.83
0.465
MVPT
OOO (High)
152
0.54
0.19
−0.17
−0.69
0.840
OOO (Color)
152
0.68
0.19
−0.22
−0.87
0.712
OOO (Size)
152
0.63
0.65
−0.08
−0.51
0.624
Motor-free Visual Perception Task, OOO = Odd One Out task (high discriminability, color, and size components). Descriptive statistics for the false 
memory tasks reflect false recognition of related lures.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 49
Table 5
Descriptive Statistics for Memory Tasks.
Memory Task
n
Mean
SD
Skew
Kurtosis
Older Adults
148
0.23
0.16
1.01
0.56
148
0.02
0.05
5.12
32.79
148
2.09
0.80
0.27
−0.20
101
0.50
0.16
0.17
−0.01
101
0.25
0.15
0.62
0.26
101
0.17
0.40
0.14
0.23
147
0.39
0.17
0.51
−0.15
147
0
0.02
5.77
40.82
147
1.77
0.59
−0.03
−0.24
Abstract Image Task
150
0.59
0.14
−0.20
−0.37
150
0.16
0.15
1.14
0.95
150
0.87
0.48
0.55
0.16
Younger Adults
203
0.27
0.19
0.82
0.02
203
0.04
0.09
2.99
9.77
203
1.89
0.95
0.61
0.69
152
0.48
0.15
−0.04
−0.48
152
0.32
0.17
0.29
−0.28
152
0.28
0.43
0.33
1.01
205
0.38
0.20
0.43
−0.33
205
0.03
0.07
3.39
12.76
205
1.51
0.88
0.33
−0.40
Abstract Image Task
201
0.52
0.15
−0.15
−0.44
201
0.17
0.16
1.06
0.86
201
0.81
0.66
0.91
0.77

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 50
Table 6
Summary of Age Difference Analyses.
Measure
Outcome of Age Comparison
No Age Differences
No Age Differences
Abstract Image Task
No Age Differences
No Age Differences
 Letter-Number Sequencing
 Backwards Digit Span
No Age Differences
 Arithmetic
 pBCST perseverative errors
 PPVT-4
 PPT
 MVPT
 OOO (High)
 OOO (color)
 OOO (Size)
Motor-free Visual Perception Task, OOO = Odd One Out Task (high discriminability, color, and size components).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 51
Table 7.
Fit Indices for CFA Models in Older and Younger Adults.
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Older Adults
Chi-squared test
X2(66) = 68.773, p = 0.384
X2(68) = 78.022, p = 0.190
X2(72) = 87.773, p = 0.100
X2(73) = 94.635, p = 0.045
CFI
0.992
0.972
0.956
0.940
TLI
0.989
0.963
0.945
0.925
RMSEA
0.017 [0, 0.052] 90% CI
0.031 [0, 0.059] 90% CI
0.038 [0, 0.063] 90% CI
0.044 [0.007, 0.068] 90% CI
SRMR
0.060
0.064
0.066
0.070
Younger Adults
Chi-squared test
X2(64) = 100.146, p = 0.003
X2(68) = 107.165, p = 0.002
X2(71) = 161.304, p < 0.001
X2(73) = 162.861, p < 0.001
CFI
0.950
0.945
0.874
0.875
TLI
0.928
0.927
0.838
0.844
RMSEA
0.052 [0.031, 0.071] 90% CI
0.052 [0.032, 0.071] 90% CI
0.078 [0.062, 0.094] 90% CI
0.076 [0.061, 0.092] 90% CI
SRMR
0.053
0.054
0.066
0.066
Note. For RMSEA and SRMR, lower values indicate better fit.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 52
Table 8.
Fit Indices for MG-SEM Models.
Configural Invariance
Weak Invariance
Strong Invariance
Chi-squared test
X2(136) = 185.187, p = 0.003
X2(146) = 196.432, p = 0.003
X2(156) = 356.771, p < 0.001
CFI
0.954
0.953
0.814
TLI
0.939
0.942
0.783
RMSEA
0.045 [0.027, 0.060] 90% CI
0.044 [0.026, 0.059] 90% CI
0.084 [0.073, 0.096] 90% CI
SRMR
0.058
0.061
0.083
Note. For RMSEA and SRMR, lower values indicate better fit.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
West et al.
Page 53
Table 9.
Moderation Analyses for Latent Variances and Regression Paths.
Likelihood Ratio Test
BF10
Variance Estimates
False Memory
X2(1) = 3.91, p = 0.048
0.37
Frontal Functioning
X2(1) = 1.27, p = 0.261
0.10
Semantic Discrimination
X2(1) = 27.28, p < 0.001
44,058.69
Perceptual Discrimination
X2(1) = 1.00, p = 0.318
0.09
Regression Paths (Joint Model)
Frontal Functioning to False Memory
X2(1) = 1.56, p = 0.211
0.12
Semantic Discrimination to False Memory
X2(1) = 1.88, p = 0.171
0.13
Perceptual Discrimination to False Memory
X2(1) = 0.29, p = 0.588
0.06
Regression Paths (Isolated Effects)
Frontal Functioning to False Memory
X2(1) = 0.51, p = 0.473
0.07
Semantic Discrimination to False Memory
X2(1) = 0.18, p = 0.668
0.06
Perceptual Discrimination to False Memory
X2(1) = 0.20, p = 0.658
0.06
Note. BF10 values reflect Bayes factors which indicate the degree of support for a moderation effect compared to a lack of moderation given model 
BIC values. Based on convention standards (Dienes, 2014), a BF10 greater than 3 indicates moderate evidence for group moderation, whereas 
a BF10 less than 1/3 indicates moderate evidence of a lack of moderation. BF10 values between 3 and 1/3 are interpreted as being ambiguous 
regarding the presence of moderation.