Murder Must Memorize
C. J. Brainerd
Department of Human Development, Cornell University
Abstract
Memory reports usually provide the evidence that is most determinative of guilt or innocence in 
criminal proceedings—including in the most serious proceedings, capital murder trials. Thus, 
memory research is bedrock science when it comes to the reliability of legal evidence, and expert 
testimony on such research is a linchpin of just verdicts. This principle is illustrated with a capital 
murder trial in which several of the most powerful forms of memory distortion were present (e.g., 
phantom recollections, robust interrogation methods that stimulate false self-incrimination). A key 
question before the jury, whether to regard the defendant’s confession as true or false, turned on a 
theoretical principle that is used to explain memory distortion in the laboratory, the verbatim-gist 
distinction, and on research showing that it is possible to create false memories that embody the 
gist of experience. The scientific testimony focused on instances in which false gist memories had 
been created under controlled conditions (e.g., of having been lost in a mall, of receiving surgery 
for a fictitious injury), as well as on real-life examples of false memory for the gist experience 
(e.g., recovered memories of sexual abuse, alien abduction memories). The defendant was found 
innocent of capital murder.
Keywords
false memory; false confession; interrogation; fuzzy-trace theory; verbatim-gist distinction; capital 
punishment
It is not widely understood that in criminal trials, it is uncommon to possess physical 
forensic evidence that bears directly on the guilt or innocence of specific individuals. 
Criminal cases in the U. S. have been studied for the availability of different types of 
evidence (for a review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005), and two dramatic findings are that 
physical forensic evidence is not even gathered in the preponderance of cases, and when it 
is, it cannot be used, for various reasons, more than half the time. How, then, are guilt and 
innocence determined?
The answer is quite surprising to lay persons: by what people say—or sometimes write— 
about events. The determinative evidence about who did what, where, when, and to whom 
reduces to what witnesses and suspects report; memory reports in other words. It follows 
that the study of accuracies and inaccuracies in human memory is bedrock science for the 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to C. J. Brainerd, Department of Human Development, Cornell University, 
Ithaca, NY 14853. cb299@cornell.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
Memory. 2013 July ; 21(5): 547–555. doi:10.1080/09658211.2013.791322.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

reliability of legal evidence. A simple maxim that I teach to law students is that the science 
of memory is as central to the law as biology is to medicine.
The most serious legal proceedings are no exception. To illustrate, when I reviewed files 
from the last five capital cases that I have worked on, as well as one that is in progress, I 
discovered in all of them that the evidence that had been used to charge and try the 
defendants was information secured through memory reports. This should not be interpreted 
to mean that physical forensic evidence is rarely presented in capital cases. On the contrary, 
a mountain of it is typically presented, most of which consists of details of crime scenes 
introduced through photographs, objects, and documents during the testimony of witnesses. 
At first, this seems reassuring, but the feeling evaporates because this type of evidence is 
rarely determinative of guilt or innocence: The fact that findings from medical examinations 
establish that a victim was forcibly drowned during an interval when a suspect does not have 
an alibi obviously does not connect that suspect to the victim. Physical evidence of the latter 
sort—say, the victim’s DNA on the suspect’s hands or clothing or vice versa—is what is 
typically lacking.
The determinative evidence that jurors must weigh, then, often consists of memory reports, 
but memory is fragile and fallible. Worse, memory reports routinely conflict: Witness A 
remembers Suspect 1 bragging about committing a murder, and Witness B remembers 
Suspect 2 bragging about committing the same murder—as in State of Arizona v. De Cochea 
(2004). Uncertainties about the reliability of memory reports are therefore the rule—so that 
jurors must rely on intuitive theories of memory to evaluate the relative credibility of 
different reports. It is precisely here where the science of human memory serves the cause of 
justice.
I exemplify this point by discussing a capital trial in which I provided scientific testimony. 
This trial was selected because (a) it demonstrates that a theoretical principle that is used to 
explain laboratory false memory (the verbatim-gist distinction; Brainerd & Mojardin, 1998; 
Brainerd & Reyna, 1998, 2012) is also fundamental to confession evidence; (b) the 
defendant was on trial for his life—which meant that if the jury got it wrong, an innocent 
man might die or a murderer might go free; (c) the case illustrates how multiple examples of 
powerful memory distortion factors that have been identified in controlled experimentation 
infect memory reports in capital trials; and (d) all of those factors were present in the 
memory of a single individual, who happened to be the defendant—so that the jury’s task of 
assessing the credibility of memory reports reduced to assessing the credibility of those of a 
single person.
Seven Memory Concerns
From the standpoint of memory distortion, a major way that criminal cases differ from 
memory experiments is that multiple variables that have been found to falsify memory in 
experiments (e.g., delay, fatigue, rumor-mongering) are all present together, in a sort of 
distortion stew. Because many such variables are present, researchers can be confident that 
memory reports are distorted in predictable directions, but because the variables cannot be 
disentangled, it is difficult testify as to which reports are most likely to be distorted. For 
Brainerd
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

instance, a neutral memory interview that is conducted shortly after events is known to 
inoculate true memories against forgetting and to reduce false memories during later 
interviews (e.g., Brainerd & Reyna, 1996; Poole & White, 1995), but a suggestive interview 
is known to implant false information that will be remembered as true during a later 
interview (e.g., Bruck & Ceci, 1999; Howe, 1991; Loftus, Miller, & Burns, 1978; Zaragoza, 
et al., 2001). If Witness A, who was first interviewed non-suggestively a month after a 
crime, provides a report that exonerates a suspect while Witness B, who was first 
interviewed a day after the crime in a highly suggestive manner, provides a report that 
incriminates the same suspect, it is difficult to say which is more reliable. Different 
distortive influences are operating and are confounded with each other (long delay but non-
suggestive interviewing versus short delay but suggestive interviewing).
In the present case, there were seven major memory concerns, all of which revolved around 
the defendant. They are described in Table 1. Note that they range from the fact that we all 
have spontaneous false memories of everyday events (e.g., remembering arriving home an 
hour earlier than we did), which seems innocuous at first but has huge consequences in legal 
evidence, to something whose consequences are obviously serious: false confessions 
induced by interrogation practices. A routine feature of capital trials is that defendants and 
suspects have provided memory reports under interrogation. Those reports may include 
confessions, which happened in this case. As the possibility of false confession loomed 
large, a list of techniques that figure in the gold standard interrogation procedure, the Reid 
method (Inbau et al., 2001), is provided in Table 2. Readers who are familiar with false 
memory research will recognize three features of these techniques. First, the retrieval 
method that is least likely to produce false memories, free narrative recall, is completely 
absent. Second, each of the techniques has been separately shown to stimulate false 
memories in controlled experimentation (Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). Third, the techniques 
can be roughly ordered, from top to bottom, on a dimension of increasing distortive power, 
with the techniques near the bottom (e.g., enforced agreement, lying about evidence) being 
extremely powerful fabricators of memories.
Case Timeline
The events leading up to this trial occurred in a Midwestern town of some historical 
prominence because it is the home town of a former President. The events occurred in the 
early hours of a Sunday morning, and they involved a 20-year-old man and his infant son. 
Shortly after 2 a.m., the man placed a 911 call requesting emergency assistance for his son, 
whom he said was not breathing. When the emergency responders arrived, they noted that he 
was frantic and crying about his son not breathing. According to the emergency responders, 
the man stated to them that he and the infant were sleeping in the same room, that he had 
been awakened by a loud noise, and that he had discovered that the infant was not breathing 
when he checked him. The responders found the infant in his crib, noted that he was not 
breathing, and noted that his skin had a bluish hue. The responders attempted to revive the 
infant but to no avail. The infant was transported to a local hospital, where he was 
pronounced dead. The death was recorded as “suspicious” because bruises were observed on 
the infant’s leg, though the bruises were not the cause of death.
Brainerd
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A series of events followed that led to the father being arrested, charged with capital murder, 
and eventually tried for that crime. As these precipitating events will be analyzed from the 
perspective of memory research, a timeline that describes them is provided in Table 3.
Forensic Investigation and Preliminary Hearing
The trial occurred in two stages: a preliminary evidentiary hearing to determine the 
admissibility of his confession and, five months later, the trial itself. Before the preliminary 
hearing, I conducted a forensic investigation that centered on the question of whether there 
were serious reliability concerns about the memory reports that had been given during the 
father’s two interrogations and during his police interview (which also involved 
interrogation tactics). From the perspective of the scientific literature, there were three 
potential areas of concern: (a) the established power of memory suggestion to generate self-
incriminating false memories; (b) the fact that false confessions are statistically frequent in 
serious crimes: (c) the fact that the defendant belonged to a class of individuals whose 
memories are known to be especially vulnerable to distortion.
Concerning a, all of the memory reports were obtained using suggestive interrogation 
procedures in which the interrogator supplies the “memories” and attempts, by various 
means, to pressure the witness or suspect to agree (for details, see Table 3). The ability of 
such procedures to induce false memory reports of criminal events, including self-
incriminating acts, is well established (for a review see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). 
Concerning b, although the defendant’s memory reports involving confessing to acts that 
could lead to capital punishment (for details, see Table 3), it is well established that 
interrogation techniques like those in Table 2 can cause people to falsely agree with 
suggested acts of capital murder (Kassin et al., 2010). For instance, in Cook County, Illinois
—a jurisdiction that emphasizes interrogation-induced confessions in criminal investigations
—Armstong, Milles, and Possley (2001) documented 247 false confessions in murder cases 
during a single decade. A similar data source is provided by the Innocence Project (http://
www.innocenceproject.org/), which has exonerated many defendants who were wrongfully 
convicted of murder and other crimes—approximately one-quarter of whom had confessed 
to the crimes. Concerning c, some individuals are especially vulnerable to spontaneous false 
memories and false memories from suggestion and, hence, to false confession. Three 
standard examples are children, elderly adults, and adults with developmental disabilities 
(for a review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). The defendant’s school records revealed that he 
was developmentally disabled: He had been identified as an at-risk child as a preschooler, 
had received several years of special education services, was legally classified as learning-
disabled, and had low psychometric intelligence (more than 1 SD below the mean) but not 
low enough to meet the threshold for mental retardation (2 SDs below the mean).
Legally if not scientifically, there is an important distinction between pressure tactics and 
coercion. Many states have statutes that prohibit coerced confessions, and it is customary to 
hold preliminary hearings to determine whether confessions are admissible at trial. Such a 
hearing was held before this defendant was tried for murder. Prior the hearing, I conducted 
an interview with the defendant, which had two purposes. One was to administer a forensic 
memory instrument to obtain data about his susceptibility to spontaneous false memory and 
Brainerd
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

suggestion that could be presented to the court. This instrument (Gudjonsson, 1984) exposes 
the subject to a narrative of events surrounding an assault and robbery, followed by a 
memory test that measures spontaneous false memory for the events in the narrative, 
followed by a second memory test that measures susceptibility to suggestion about the 
events. The defendant’s scores were roughly 2 SDs above the means of available norms for 
susceptibility to both types of false memory. The other purpose of the interview was to ask a 
series of scripted questions that would supply additional information about susceptibility to 
the distortive influences that were present in the interview and interrogations. The questions 
fell into the following general categories:
•
what he knew about the police officer who interrogated him and whether he 
reposed trust in the officer and considered that he was there to help him;
•
whether additional, off-the-record interrogations had occurred in which his 
account was prepared, shaped, or rehearsed, during the two-day interval between 
his first and second interrogations;
•
whether he knew at the time that things that the officer asked him to agree to 
were false;
•
whether he believed that the officer was in a better position, at the time of the 
interrogations, to know the facts about his son’s death than he was;
•
whether he believed that he was supposed to report only things he remembered 
or also to report things that he thought the must be true from what he had been 
told;
•
whether his self-incriminating statements (each of which was reviewed with him) 
were things that he actually remembered at the time of the interrogations;
•
whether he knew that police officers could lie to him about the evidence against 
him;
•
what his perceived level of fatigue had been during the recorded interview and 
the recorded interrogations;
•
what he knew about his status as a special education student during his school 
years.
The gist of the defendant’s answers was that he had known the interrogator for many years 
and trusted him implicitly, that off-the-record interrogations had occurred in which points 
had been rehearsed, that he knew that the acts that he had agreed to were false at the time but 
had agreed because he believed he would be better off because the interrogator was trying to 
help him, that he agreed to things that he did not remember but thought must be true because 
of what he was told, that he thought the officer knew the facts about his son’s death much 
better than he did, that none of the five murder scenarios were acts that he remembered 
doing, and that he believed that it was illegal for a police officer to lie to him about anything. 
A final dramatic item was phantom recollection of the murder scenarios. The defendant 
stated that he knew for certain that he could not have committed the acts that he had agreed 
to, but that he now had vivid flashbacks of committing those acts. Readers who are familiar 
Brainerd
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with the high levels of phantom recollection that can be induced by suggestive questioning 
(e.g., Zaragoza et al., 2001; 2011) will not be surprised by this.
The above information, along with a summary of scientific findings on spontaneous and 
suggestion-induced false memory, was presented as part of scientific testimony to determine 
the admissibility the defendant’s confession. Based on Table 3, most readers will probably 
regard his self-incriminating statements as coerced, but that does not meet the legal test of 
coercion under most statutes, which focuses on physical coercion and intimidation. Inflicting 
physical pain (e.g., the “enhanced” interrogation methods that we have heard so much about 
since the 11 September 2001 massacre in New York), inflicting extremes of temperature, or 
threatening to inflict physical pain meet the test under most statutes. Other circumstances 
that involve passive induction of physical pain—interrogation of suspects who have been 
deprived of sleep or food or bathroom breaks, sometimes for days—usually do not meet the 
test. Psychological coercion— threatening suspects with more severe charges, lying about 
the evidence against them, forcing them to confabulate, and so on—rarely meets the test. 
Except for fatigue, the coercion to which the defendant was subjected was purely 
psychological.
Throughout my testimony, there was persistent discussion (including questions from the 
court) of (a) the line between physical and psychological coercion and (b) the extent to 
which the two forms of coercion have analogous effects on people’s memory reports. 
Scientifically, it is well known that psychological coercion distorts memory reports and 
induces vivid false memories (e.g., this defendant’s phantom recollections), and that fact 
was carefully documented during testimony. Ultimately, the judge ruled against the motion
—citing the specification of physical coercion in the state’s statute but offering the opinion 
that the statute should evolve in the direction of psychological coercion in light of the 
scientific evidence.
In moving to exclude the confession, the defense strategy was not to secure a favorable 
ruling but, rather, to put a large amount of testimony on the record showing how extreme the 
psychological coercion had been (see Table 3) and documenting the known effects of such 
coercion from the false memory literature. It was felt that jurors would be revolted by the 
interrogation tactics, which proved to be correct, and that the scientific testimony would 
reinforce their disgust by documenting that the distortive effects of the tactics were well 
known to researchers.
Other major topics of the preliminary hearing testimony were: (a) basic theoretical principles 
of false memory; (b) individuals who are at increased risk of spontaneous false memory and 
susceptibility to suggestion, focusing on developmentally-disabled individuals; (c) scientific 
findings on false confession, emphasizing laboratory demonstrations of false confession 
accompanied by phantom recollection and examples of known false confessions to murder 
pursuant to interrogation; (d) how suggestion affects people’s memories; and (e) scientific 
findings on specific techniques that featured in the defendant’s interrogations. To my 
astonishment, a major dispute that surfaced during cross-examination and continued during 
the trial a few months later revolved around an explanatory principle of fuzzy-trace theory 
(FTT), the verbatim-gist distinction. The dispute was over whether research had established 
Brainerd
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

that memory suggestion or spontaneous distortion processes can falsify people’s gist 
memories of experience, or only their verbatim memories.
It turned out that this is pivotal to whether the defendant’s confession ought to be accepted 
as reliable, despite all the psychological coercion. It comes as a shock to most lay persons 
that whether or not specific acts that suspects remember are demonstrably false is not crucial 
to whether their confessions are represented as true in court. As long as suspects agree to 
committing acts of the type they are charged with (i.e., capital murder), they are deemed to 
have confessed to the crimes (the gist) on the ground that innocent people do not confess; 
that is, their memory for the gist of what they did is viewed as accurate, even in the face of 
errors in memory for verbatim details. In the present case, everyone agreed that many, if not 
most, of the acts to which the defendant had agreed were false because (a) he had agreed to 
inflicting his son’s injuries in five different ways (see Table 3), and (b) all five scenarios 
were difficult to reconcile with medical evidence. The key scientific question, then, was 
whether memory distortion factors can falsify gist as well as verbatim memory (i.e., create a 
“deliberate injury” gist when the true gist is “accidental injury”). Readers of Memory know 
that the answer is yes; that it is indeed possible to manufacture gist memories from whole 
cloth (e.g., see Chrobak & Zaragoza, 2008), including false gist memories of whole life 
experiences that, like crimes, are emotionally distressing—ranging from fictitious memories 
of having been lost in a mall or have received surgery for an injury to being sexually abused 
or abducted by aliens. However, the prosecution maintained that the answer was no, and it 
was up to the jury to decide.1 By sheer coincidence, suggestion-induced false memory for 
child and adolescent sexual abuse had been receiving wide-spread media attention for more 
than a year, so trial jurors were already be comfortable with the possibility that one’s 
memory for the gist of experience can be falsified by suggestion.
Trial Testimony
In cases such as this, where scientific evidence is first presented during preliminary hearings, 
the eventual trial testimony is usually anti-climactic. When it comes to the specific research 
that bears on the case, it will all have been said before, and then some because the scope of 
trial testimony is narrower than that of a preliminary hearing—unless, of course, some 
dramatic new data have recently been published. Further, you will have already responded to 
any major challenges to your testimony during cross-examination and have had any faux pas 
rehabilitated during re-direct examination. Naturally, the cross-examining attorney will 
strive to identify new challenges that will thoroughly impeach your trial testimony. That will 
rarely happen, as long as your opinions were firmly grounded in the scientific literature. If, 
on the other hand, those opinions were based on unreliable foundations such as professional 
wisdom, experience, or training, you deserve what you get, and if you get what you deserve, 
you will not make the same mistake twice.
The defense’s emphasis at the preliminary hearing on suggestion-induced gist memory for 
false traumatic events, such as recovered memories of sexual abuse, had two effects on the 
1In the law, the criterion for yes and no answers is to a reasonable degree of scientific probability, not certainty. Therefore, it is 
possible for opposing attorneys to maintain mutually inconsistent interpretations of the same experimental data by disputing whether 
or not those data reach the “reasonable degree” threshold.
Brainerd
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

prosecution’s presentation of its case at trial. First, rather than challenge all examples of 
false memory for the gist experience, the focus was on cutting the ground from under this 
major source of illustrations—the thinking being that if jurors believed that scientific 
support for it was shaky, they would take a dim view of other examples of false gist 
memories. Second, it was decided to present a rebuttal witness at trial who would challenge 
scientific findings on false recovered memory of sexual abuse. Because those findings were 
extensive, the chances were not promising that this strategy would be successful, but as the 
case seemed to hinge on whether the jurors would regard the gist of defendant’s confession 
as true, the strategy had to be tried.
Once a trial has begun and the attorneys’ attention is fully occupied, scientific witnesses 
mostly wait at remote locations (my routine is to find a local track or park and concentrate 
on running) until called to testify. Then, you travel to the courthouse, take the oath, testify, 
leave the courtroom, and step on plane for home. Again, an exception, which happened in 
this case, is when the opposing attorney presents a rebuttal witness, in which event you 
remain to hear the rebuttal testimony and provide re-rebuttal. All of this is a fair summary of 
the scientific testimony in this case, except for the fact that the rebuttal witness’ testimony 
was deemed to be so inept that there was no need for re-rebuttal testimony, even though I 
had prepared extensively for re-rebuttal. I should add that the circumstance of preparing 
extensively for testimony, only to learn at the last minute that it will not be given, is 
prototypical of this sort of work.
Verdict
In addition to first degree murder, the defendant had been charged with and simultaneously 
tried for involuntary manslaughter of a victim less than 12-years-old. The latter charge 
carried a 10 year sentence, which would be reduced to 8 years for time served prior to trial. 
The judge instructed the jurors to return one of three verdicts: (a) guilty of first degree 
murder; (b) guilty of involuntary manslaughter; (c) innocent of both charges. In capital 
cases, the first verdict does not mean that the jury is sentencing the defendant to death 
because that must be decided in a separate trial, during which other types of evidence are 
presented. The jury returned verdict b.
No juror is obligated to discuss how a verdict was reached, and if none do, it remains a 
mystery. However, some of jurors in this case were willing to be interviewed, and the 
essence of what they said centered on two contrasting themes. On the one hand, there was 
unanimous agreement that the defendant was not guilty of first degree murder and, perhaps, 
should never have been charged with it, considering the evidence. Among the reasons cited, 
two stood out—the testimony of character witnesses, which convinced jurors that the 
defendant was a gentle person who was easily misled by people in authority, and the 
scientific testimony, which convinced jurors that there were firm grounds for believing that 
the defendant’s self-incriminating statements had been manufactured by interrogation 
tactics. On the other hand, the jurors could not find that the defendant innocent of any 
culpability. A life had been lost before it had been lived, and there was unanimous 
agreement that the defendant had been at least negligent in allowing that to happen, which 
led to a verdict of involuntary manslaughter. The jurors remarked that the defendant could 
Brainerd
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

complete his sentence by age 28 and still have a full life before him. This verdict was not 
appealed, and the defendant began serving his sentence shortly thereafter.
Acknowledgments
Portions of the research were supported by National Institutes of Health Grant 1RC1AG036915-02 to the author.
References
Armstong K, Milles S, Possley M. Coercive and illegal tactics torpedo scores of Cook County murder 
cases. Chicago Tribune. Dec 16.2001 
Brainerd CJ, Mojardin AH. Children’s and adults’ spontaneous false memories: Long-term persistence 
and mere testing effects. Child Development. 1998; 69:1361–1377. [PubMed: 9839421] 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF. Mere memory testing creates false memories in children. Developmental 
Psychology. 1996; 32:467–476.
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF. When things that never happened are easier to remember than things that did. 
Psychological Science. 1998; 9:484–489.
Brainerd, CJ, Reyna, VF. The science of false memory. Oxford University Press; New York: 2005. 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF. Reliability of children’s testimony in the era of developmental reversals. 
Developmental Review. 2012; 32:224–267. [PubMed: 23139439] 
Brainerd CJ, Payne DG, Wright R, Reyna VF. Phantom recall. Journal of Memory and Language. 
2003; 48:445–467.
Bruck M, Ceci SJ. The suggestibility of children’s memory. Annual Review of Psychology. 1999; 
50:419–439.
Ceci, SJ, Bruck, M. Jeopardy in the courtroom. American Psychological Association; Washington, 
DC: 1995. 
Chrobak QM, Zaragoza MS. Inventing stories: Forcing witnesses to fabricate entire fictitious events 
leads to freely reported false memories. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 2008; 15:1190–1195. 
[PubMed: 19001589] 
Gudjonsson GH. A new scale of interrogative suggestibility. Personality and Individual Differences. 
1984; 5:303–314.
Howe ML. Misleading children’s story recall: Forgetting and reminiscence of the facts. Developmental 
Psychology. 1991; 27:746–762.
Inbau, FE, Reid, JE, Buckley, JP, Jayne, BC. Criminal interrogation and confessions. 4th ed.. Aspen; 
Gaithersburg, MD: 2001. 
Kassin SM, Drizin SA, Steven A, Grisso T, Gudjonsson GH, Leo RA, Redlich AD. Police-induced 
confessions, risk factors, and recommendations: Looking ahead. Law and Human Behavior. 2010; 
34:49–52. [PubMed: 20112057] 
Kassin SM, Kiechel KL. The social psychology of false confessions: Compliance, internalization, and 
confabulation. Psychological Science. 1996; 7:125–128.
Loftus EF, Miller DG, Burns HJ. Semantic integration of verbal information into visual memory. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory. 1978; 4:19–31. [PubMed: 
621467] 
Payne DG, Elie CJ, Blackwell JM, Neuschatz JS. Memory illusions: Recalling, recognizing, and 
recollecting events that never occurred. Journal of Memory and Language. 1996; 35:261–285.
Poole, DA, White, LT. Tell me again and again: Stability and change in the repeated testimonies of 
children and adults. In: Zaragoza, M, Graham, JR, N, GN, HallHirschman, R, Ben-Porath, YS, 
editors. Memory, suggestibility, and eyewitness testimony in children and adults. Sage; Thousand 
Oaks, CA: 1995. 24–43. 
Scullin MH, Ceci SJ. A suggestibility scale for children. Personality and Individual Differences. 2001; 
30:843–856.
State of Arizona v. De Cochea. Superior Court, Pima County; Arizona: 2004. 
Brainerd
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Weekes BS, Hamilton S, Oakhill J, Holliday RE. False recollection in children with reading 
comprehension difficulties. Cognition. 2007; 106:222–233. [PubMed: 17349990] 
Zaragoza MS, Mitchell KJ, Payment K, Drivdahl S. False memories for suggestions The impact of 
conceptual elaboration. Journal of Memory and Language. 2011; 64:18–31. [PubMed: 21103451] 
Zaragoza MS, Payment KE, Ackil JK, Drivdahl SB, Beck M. Interviewing witnesses: Forced 
confabulation and confirmatory feedback increase false memories. Psychological Science. 2001; 
12:473–477. [PubMed: 11760134] 
Brainerd
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd
Page 11
Table 1
Salient False Memory Phenomena in the Case
Phenomenon
Definition
Spontaneous false memory
People falsely remember some of the events of their lives, usually
in ways that are consistent with the gist of their experience
(Brainerd & Reyna, 2005).
False memory susceptibility
Some people are inherently more prone to spontaneous false
memory than others, and susceptibility is increased by a number of
well-studied variables (Weekes, Hamilton, Oakhill, & Holliday, 2007).
Memory suggestion
Post-event suggestions cause people to falsely remember some of
the events of their lives. Although those false memories are
usually consistent with the gist of people’s experience, suggestion
is capable of implanting erroneous gists as well (e.g., of living
other lives, of having been lost in a mall)(Howe, 1991; Lotus, Miller, & Burns, 1978; Zaragoza, Payment, Ackil, 
Drivdahl, & Beck; 2001).
Suggestion susceptibility
Some people are inherently more susceptible to the effects of
suggestion than others, and susceptibility is increased by a number
of well-studied variables (Scullin & Ceci, 2001).
Phantom recollection
False memories can be accompanied by illusory vivid recollection
of the physical details of the “occurrence” of events (Brainerd, Payne, Wright, & Reyna, 2003; Payne, Elie, 
Blackwell, & Neuschatz, 1996).
False confession
By falsely remembering events that did not happen, either
spontaneously or pursuant to suggestion, people can falsely
confess to crimes that they did not commit, even murder (Kassin & Kiechel, 1996).
Interrogation
Standard interrogation techniques that are used by police in the
U.S. contain multiple factors that have been shown, in controlled
experiments, to produce false memories (Brainerd & Reyna, 2005).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd
Page 12
Table 2
Some Features of Standard Police Interrogation Techniques that Increase False Memories
Technique
Definition
1. Yes/no
Interviewees are asked to agree/disagree with pertinent items of
information.
2. Multiple choice
Interviewees are asked to choose between alternative items of information.
3. Fill-in
Interviewees are asked to provide a pertinent item of information that is
assumed to be true by interrogators.
4. Repetition
Interrogators ask questions again and again, even though they have been
clearly answered.
5. Evidence exposure
Interrogators familiarize interviewees with evidence (e.g., pictures of
victims or suspects or of details of crime scenes) that they will later be
asked to “remember.”
6. Challenges
Once questions have been asked and answered, the answers are rejected,
challenged, and interviewees are asked to consider whether other answers
are correct.
7. Forced agreement
Interrogators demand that interviewees accede to pertinent items of
information that interrogators assert to be true.
8. Forced
 disagreement
Once questions have been asked and answered, the answers are rejected,
interviewees are told that their answers are false, and they are asked to
change previous answers.
9. Negative
 reinforcement
Interviewees are punished (e.g., kept awake, deprived of food) or
threatened with punishment (e.g., being charged as an accomplice in the
crime under investigation, being charged with making false statements to a
police investigator) for failure to provide pertinent items of information
(e.g., confirming a victim’s description of a suspect).
10. Positive
 reinforcement
Interviewees are rewarded (e.g., with sleep, with food) or promised future
rewards (e.g., not being charged as an accomplice, not being charged with
making false statements to a police investigator) for providing pertinent
items of information (e.g., confirming a victim’s description of a suspect).
11. False evidence
Interrogators lie to interviewees about pertinent items of evidence, by
telling them that pertinent items of information have already been
evidence established as facts by other means.
12. Appeals to
 External authority
Interviewees are told that based on considerations of logic, fact, or
common sense, pertinent items of information must be true and that they
obviously are lying if they do not agree with such information.
13. Stereotype
 Induction
Interviewees are provided with true or false information about suspects
that is consistent with crimes that are under investigation.
14. Confirmation bias
Interviewees are interrogated by investigators who are highly
knowledgeable about the detailed facts of the case and who have
interviewed victims and other witnesses.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd
Page 13
Table 3
Timeline for Key Events in the Case
Event
Narrative
1
The infant’s mother was interviewed by the police on Sunday morning. There
was no evidence that the death was due to unnatural causes, but because it had
been classified as suspicious, the police pursued the hypothesis that the father had
beaten the infant to death. Hence, they attempted, through suggestive
questioning, to obtain information that the mother’s relationship with the father
was rocky and that the father was angry, aggressive, and prone to hitting her or
her son. The mother denied these suggestions.
2
The father was then interviewed, immediately after the mother. He was extremely
fatigued from having slept little for two days. Although this was an interview
rather than an interrogation, many interrogation tactics were used to produce
statements of motive for murdering the infant. Multiple suggestions were made
that he had frequent fights with the infant’s mother and that he was angry with her
on Saturday evening for leaving him alone to care for their son while she attended
a family reunion, the latter being the motive that the police were attempting to
establish. The father denied this. The police officer repeatedly suggested that the
father must have dropped his son that evening or that the infant had fallen. The
father stated that infant had received a minor bruise when he bumped his head on
the coffee table after a feeding. The officer then lied about the evidence, saying
that he had received detailed information about the infant’s injuries from the
medical examiner that disproved what the father said. The officer made
suggestions that the father had been furious with the mother and that he had
shaken, squeezed, and deliberately battered his son, all of which were denied.
3
The first official interrogation of the father, who was now classified as a murder
suspect, was conducted one hour later, when he was still in a state of severe sleep
deprivation. In an attempt to secure his trust, the interrogating officer was a long-
time friend who has been the father’s Little League baseball coach. The
interrogator accused the father of lying in the earlier interview, and he made
repeated strong assertions that the father was mad while was caring for his son
and had pummeled him. This was denied. The interrogator repeated all of the
assertions, saying the father was minimizing. Further strong suggestions about
ways in which the infant had been battered were added, coupled with statements
that the officer was trying to help the father get out a tight spot. To establish
motive, the interrogator stated and restated that the father had been angry with
the mother for leaving him to care for their son. This was repeatedly denied, but
the father eventually agreed that he was “a little bit peeved.” Having secured
agreement with the anger theme (motive), the interrogator lied to the father about
details of the infant’s injuries, with which he was not acquainted, saying that they
disconfirmed the father’s account. The father agreed with some of those
suggestions, which were therefore false memory reports. During the course of the
interrogation, the interrogator manufactured multiple different accounts of the
infant’s injuries, all of which were asserted to be true but each of which was
denied. Eventually, the father agreed with certain features of one of the
interrogator’s accounts—saying that he could not remember those things
happening and that he was agreeing because he could not think of another
explanation. The interrogator made further suggestions about the injuries that
were inconsistent with later autopsy results and then arrested the father on
suspicion of murder. Other information that emerged during the interrogation
indicated that the rather was either developmentally disabled or retarded. Such
individuals are known to be highly susceptible to suggestion and to spontaneous
false memory,
4
A second interrogation was conducted by the father’s former Little League couch
two days later. The strength of the interrogation techniques was increased to
those from level 7 onward in Table 2. The interrogator told the father that he
would help him craft an account that would agree with the facts. Although the
interrogator was now familiar with the autopsy results, he continued to lie about
them results to secure agreement with an account that was consistent with murder,
saying he had been told by the medical examiner that the infant’s head had been
hit with a force that was equivalent to more than a two-story fall and that the
father’s account was medically impossible. To encourage agreement with a
different account, the interrogator stated that things would go better for the father,
that the prosecutor would throw the book at him unless he cooperated, and that
god would punish him in the afterlife unless he cooperated. The interrogator
suggested five different ways in which the infant had been murdered. Following
initial denial of each, the father eventually agreed with some version of each,
saying such things as “I must have,” “it could have happened like that,” and “it
must have happened like that.” Following those agreements, the interrogation

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd
Page 14
Event
Narrative
was quickly terminated, and the father was returned to his cell.
5
Shortly thereafter, the father requested to speak to a guard. He stated that the
interrogator had put words in his mouth and induced him to agree with things that
were not true. This statement was duly reported by the guard. Such recantations
are standard features of coerced-compliant false confessions (Kassin et al., 2010).
However, the father was charged with first degree murder of his son, and
following a review of the case for the presence of aggravators that warrant capital
punishment, the State’s Attorney requested the death penalty.