Developmental Reversals in False Memory:Development is 
Complementary, Not Compensatory
C J. Reyna,
Department of Human Development and Human Neuroscience Institute, Cornell University
V. F. Brainerd, and
Department of Human Development and Human Neuroscience Institute, Cornell University
R. E. Holliday
Department of Psychology, University of Leicester
Abstract
We report the first example of a true complementarity effect in memory development—a situation 
in which memory for the same event simultaneously becomes more and less accurate between 
early childhood and adulthood. We investigated this paradoxical effect because fuzzy-trace theory 
predicts that it can occur in paradigms that produce developmental reversals in false memory, 
which are circumstances in which adults are more likely than children to remember new events as 
old. The complementarity prediction is: If subjects separately judge whether those same events are 
new but similar to old ones, adults will be more accurate than children, even though adults are less 
accurate when they judge whether the items are old. We report four experiments in which children 
(6- and 10-year-olds), adolescents (14-year-olds), and adults encoded the modal developmental 
reversal materials, DRM lists. Then, they responded to memory tests on which half the subjects 
judged whether test items were old and half judged whether the same items were new-similar. The 
paradoxical complementarity effect was detected in all experiments: The tendency to falsely 
remember new-similar items as being old increased with development, but so did the tendency to 
correctly remember them as being new-similar.
Keywords
Developmental reversals; complementarity; compensation; false memory; fuzzy-trace theory
Developmental reversals in false memory are compelling illustrations of the paradoxical 
nature of human cognition. They are instances in which the baseline tendency to falsely 
remember events that did not happen is not only high, but it increases during normal 
development. Also, net accuracy (the ratio of true to false memory) may even decline. These 
phenomena are puzzling from many points of view. For example, they violate a core 
principle of cognitive development, the law of positive progression (Brainerd & Reyna, 
2012), they run counter to the familiar rule that differentiating reality from fantasy is more 
difficult for children than for adults (Brainerd, Reyna, & Zember, 2011), and they challenge 
Corresponding author: C J. Brainerd, G331 MVR Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, 607-254-1163, cb299@cornell.edu. 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
Dev Psychol. 2018 September ; 54(9): 1773–1784. doi:10.1037/dev0000554.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

polices that govern how the courts interpret the reliability of children’s memory reports 
(Klemfuss & Ceci, 2012).
In this article, we report that developmental reversals are even more counterintuitive than 
currently supposed because they also violate a principle of logical coherence, which 
stipulates that memory is compensatory across mutually incompatible reality states. Two 
reality states are incompatible if an object or event cannot belong to both of them 
simultaneously. For instance, following the encoding phase of a memory experiment, a test 
item cannot have been presented and not presented; it must be one or the other. The 
compensation principle merely states that if the tendency to remember that an item belongs 
to a specific state (say, “presented”) increases with development, the tendency to remember 
that it belongs to some logically incompatible state (say, “not presented”) must decrease.
Compensation means that memory development is logically coherent: Increased memory for 
one reality state is coupled with decreased memory for other incompatible states. The 
alternative to compensation, developmental complementarity, troubles our intuition greatly. 
Complementarity means that the tendency to remember mutually incompatible states 
increases with development, so that logical coherence degrades. In the experiments reported 
below, we shall see that the false memory phenomenon that has dominated developmental 
reversal research, the Deese/Roediger/McDermott (DRM; Deese, 1959; Roediger & 
McDermott, 1995) illusion, exhibits precisely this pattern. Before presenting the 
experiments, we sketch some salient features of prior research that place this pattern in 
context.
Literature Overview
An intriguing fact about developmental reversals is that they conflict with a century of 
settled science, which showed that false memories decline during normal development. In 
addition to some early studies (e.g., Binet, 1900), much evidence of developmental declines 
has accumulated since the 1990s. To illustrate, developmental declines in spontaneous false 
memory have been reported using paradigms such as memory for source details (Ackerman, 
1992, 1994), for live event sequences (Pipe, Gee, Wilson, & Egerton, 1999; Poole & White, 
1991), for metaphorical statements (Reyna & Kiernan, 1995), for mathematics problems 
(Brainerd & Gordon, 1994), for word lists (Bjorklund & Muir, 1988), and even for nonsense 
rhymes (Brainerd, Stein, Reyna, 1998). Similarly, declines in implanted false memories have 
been reported using paradigms as varied as memory for forced confabulations (Ackil & 
Zaragoza, 1998), for traumatic experiences (Goodman, Quas, Batterman-Faunce, 
Riddlesberger, & Kuhn, 1994), for crime videos (Bjorklund, Bjorklund, & Brown, 1998), for 
physical and emotional pain (Bruck, Ceci, Francoeur, E., & Barr, 1995), and for quasi-sexual 
events (Poole & Lindsay, 1995). Taken together, such findings made the developmental 
decline rule seem very secure (see various chapters in Bjorklund, 2000).
Appearances were deceiving, however. Brainerd and Reyna (1998) and Ceci and Bruck 
(1998) were the first to show that fuzzy-trace theory (FTT) predicts that false memories can 
actually increase with age when they have two properties: (a) Distortion is rooted in 
comprehending and connecting the semantic content of experience, and (b) it is difficult to 
Reyna et al.
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

use verbatim memory for actual events to suppress false memories. Brainerd and Mojardin 
(1998) confirmed that prediction with a paradigm in which false memory was driven by 
connecting narrative gist across sentences (property a) whose surface forms were so similar 
that it was difficult to tell exactly which ones had been presented (property b). Soon, several 
investigators noticed that the paradigm in Table 1, the DRM illusion, has these same two 
properties, and they found that the illusion intensifies throughout childhood and adolescence 
(Brainerd, Reyna, Forrest, 2002; Dewhurst & Robinson, 2004; Howe, 2005). In the DRM 
procedure, subjects encode lists of related words and respond to recognition tests containing 
three types of probes: old (O) list words, new-similar (NS) words, and new-different (ND) 
words (cf. Table 1). The task is simply to judge whether each probe is old, with old 
judgments about O, NS, and ND items being classified as true memories, false memories, 
and response bias, respectively.
To date, developmental reversals have been detected with an array of paradigms, including 
memory for categorized photographs (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004), for historical text (Fazio & 
Marsh, 2008), for pictures of familiar objects (Ceci, Papierno, & Kulkofksy, 2007), for play 
sessions (Connolly & Price, 2006), for emotional facial expressions (Fernandez-Dols, 
Carrera, Barchard, & Gacitua, 2008), for emotional words (Brainerd, Holliday, Reyna, Yang, 
& Toglia, 2010), for causal inferences (Lyons, Cornoldi, & Ghetti, 2010), for everyday 
activities (Otgaar, Howe, Brackmann, & Smeets, 2016), and for rumors (Principe, Guiliano, 
& Root, 2008). However, the DRM illusion has remained the workhorse, with roughly two-
thirds of published experiments having relied on it (see Brainerd & Reyna, 2012, Table 1). 
There are sound practical reasons for this: The paradigm combines high efficiency in false 
memory production with great simplicity, adaptability, and ease of application with children.
The large archive of DRM research demonstrates that as development unfolds, NS items are 
increasingly misremembered as being what they are not (old) rather than what they are 
(new-similar), and by early adulthood, false memory for NS items approaches true memory 
for O items. It is well established that the magnitude of this trend is influenced by many 
theoretically-motivated manipulations (for a review, see Brainerd et al., 2011). A few 
illustrations are encouraging subjects to encode semantic relations (Lampinen, Leding, 
Reed, & Odegard, 2006; Odegard, Holliday, Brainerd, & Reyna, 2008), increasing the 
examples of those relations (Sugrue & Hayne, 2006), providing more time to encode list 
words (Carneiro & Fernandez, 2010), interfering with encoding by dividing attention 
(Otgaar, Peters, & Howe, 2012), binding list words together with narratives (Dewhurst, 
Pursglove, & Lewis, 2007), binding list words together with emotional relations (e.g., Howe, 
2007), comparing subjects who differ in semantic ability (Weekes, Hamilton, Oakhill, & 
Holliday, 2007), and comparing subjects who differ in clinical conditions that affect 
semantic processing (Goodman et al., 2011).
The Present Study
The standard interpretation of developmental reversals in the DRM illusion is that as the 
brain matures, NS items such as cold and anger are increasingly perceived as having actually 
been presented (Brainerd & Reyna, 2012; Paz-Alonso, Ghetti, Donohue, Goodman, & 
Bunge, 2008). If so, it follows from the compensation principle that the tendency to 
Reyna et al.
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

correctly perceive that NS items are new-similar must decline with development. However, 
FTT makes the paradoxical prediction that it can increase (i.e., complementarity). 
Complementarity effects first became prominent in physics, where they refer to situations in 
which incompatible empirical states are detected for the same system when each state is 
measured separately (e.g., Gerlach & Stern, 1922). In the present case, complementarity can 
result from gist memory, as follows.
FTT assumes that the brain stores dissociated verbatim and gist traces of experience that 
capture, respectively, events’ surface form and semantic content, especially meaning 
connections among events (e.g., items on the anger list are names of emotions). In false 
memory studies, verbatim traces support true memory for O items and suppress false 
memory for NS items, whereas gist traces support both false memory for NS items and true 
memory for O items (Abadie, Warnoquer, & Terrier, 2017; Barrouillet, 2015; Bouwmeester 
& Verkoeijen, 2010; Bruer & Pozzulo, 2014; Lampinen & Odegard, 2006). In other words, 
verbatim traces are compensatory across incompatible reality states (support one, reject the 
other), but gist traces are complementary (support both; Brainerd, Wang, Reyna, & 
Nakamura, 2015).
In addition to FTT, other explanations of developmental reversals in the DRM illusion were 
proposed after reversals were reported (see Howe, 2006; Metzger, Warren, Price, Reed, 
Shelton, & Williams, 2008). However, FTT makes the even more paradoxical 
complementarity prediction, which does not follow from these later hypotheses. 
Developmental complementarity falls out of the effects that verbatim and gist memory have 
when the memory task is changed so that subjects must remember NS items and avoid 
falsely remembering O and ND items. Now, verbatim traces support true memory for NS 
items and suppress false memory for O items, whereas gist traces support both true memory 
for NS items and false memory for O items (Brainerd & Reyna, 2018). When performance is 
dominated by gist, then, whether memory for NS items is true or false depends on whether 
the old or the new-similar reality state is tested (Brainerd et al., 2015). Therefore, we 
modified the usual DRM design slightly, so that subjects judged whether NS items (e.g., 
cold) were new-similar, as well as whether they were old. What should development look 
like?
Remembering NS items to be old on old tests and to be new on new-similar tests is logically 
contradictory, of course, and hence, our natural intuition is that development must be 
compensatory—that cold will be progressively less likely to be remembered as new because 
we already know from developmental reversal studies that it is progressively more likely to 
be remembered as old. This would mean that although false memories increase with age, at 
least memory is becoming more logically consistent. According to FTT, however, the 
noncompensatory nature of gist means that development may not be logically consistent 
either: Developmental improvements in gist memory make both old and new-similar seem 
like accurate descriptions of cold.
We investigated whether our natural intuition or the theoretical prediction is correct by 
determining whether, as false memory for NS items increases, true memory for them 
decreases (compensation) or increases (complementarity). A further theoretical prediction is 
Reyna et al.
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

that developmental complementarity should be specific to NS items and not extend to O 
items. Here, research shows that memory for items that are actually encoded is usually 
dominated by verbatim retrieval (e.g., Abadie et al., 2017; Bouwmeester, & Verkoeijen, 
2010), and as we saw, verbatim memory, unlike gist, is compensatory across tests for 
mutually incompatible reality states.
We report four experiments in which subjects of different ages encoded DRM lists and 
responded to memory tests on which they made memory judgments about O, NS, and ND 
items, with half the subjects making traditional old judgments and half making new-similar 
judgments. Four experiments were included in order to ensure the replicability and 
generality of what is, after all, a counterintuitive effect. We tracked developmental trends in 
accuracy for NS items like those in the middle column of Table 1 and for O items like those 
in the left hand column, between early childhood and adolescence (Experiment 1) and 
between early childhood and young adulthood (Experiments 2–4).
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 implemented the most commonly used methodology in prior research and 
covered the age range that has typically been studied. Subjects from three age levels (6-, 10-, 
and 14-year-olds) were exposed to several DRM lists, followed by recognition tests on 
which there were three types of items: O, NS, and ND. Relative to most developmental 
DRM studies, Experiment 1 had two novel features. First and most important, there were 
two distinct testing conditions. Half of the subjects at each age level participated in a 
standard O? condition, in which the task was to decide whether each test item was old. The 
other half participated in an NS? condition, in which the task was to decide whether each 
test item was new-similar. It should be noted that child NS? tests were developed some years 
ago by Brainerd and Reyna (1998), and in prior developmental research, children as young 
as 5-to-7 have performed accurately on such tests (Brainerd & Reyna, 1998; Brainerd, 
Reyna, & Holliday, 2012; Holliday, Brainerd, & Reyna, 2009). However, our design 
included manipulation checks to ensure that.
The other novel feature of Experiment 1 is that the memory tests included both types of NS 
items that are shown in the middle column of Table 1—namely, strong ones (e.g., cold, 
sleep, and anger), which produce very high levels of DRM false memory in adults, and weak 
ones (e.g., frost, yawn, and mean), which produce more modest levels. Most DRM studies 
only include strong NS items, but notice that weak NS items share semantic content with list 
items. Consequently, FTT predicts the same qualitative trends for both; that is, 
developmental reversals should occur for weak as well as strong NS items, and 
developmental complementarity can occur for both.
Method
Subjects.
The subjects in Experiment 1 were 65 first-grade children (M = 6 years, 7 months), 64 fifth-
grade children (M = 10 years, 9 months), and 64 ninth-grade adolescents (M = 14 years, 5 
month). The choice of sample size was based on a statistical power analysis of prior 
Reyna et al.
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

developmental DRM experiments that the authors have reported. The analysis showed that 
sample sizes of 40 per age level would yield a power of 1-β = .8 to detect moderate-sized 
effects for the between subjects factors of age and condition.
The subjects were recruited from public school that served middle class residential areas in 
the United Kingdon, and their participation was secured via letters of parental permission. 
Subjects from each age level were randomly assigned to the O? condition or to the NS? 
condition, with the restriction that conditions should contain equal numbers of males and 
females. The research (“Development of False Memory”) was classified as exempt by the 
Institutional Review Board of the University of Kent because it involved simple behavioral 
testing, which consisted of studying word lists and responding to yes/no memory questions.
Materials.
The words for the study lists and memory tests in all four experiments were drawn from a 
normed pool of 55 DRM lists, each of which consists of the first 15 forward associates of a 
missing item (Roediger, Watson, McDermott, & Gallo, 2001). These missing items are the 
ones that are designated as strong NS in Table 1. The lists are ranked according to the levels 
of false memory that they produce for missing items (i.e., judging those items to be O). As 
the study lists for all four experiments, we selected the nine that produce the highest levels 
of false memory in these norms. (The missing items were anger, cold, cup, sleep, smell, soft, 
sweet, window, and wish.). Four additional lists were used as sources of items for the 
instructions and practice tests.
The first 12 words from each of the 9 DRM lists formed the lists that were presented to the 
subjects at each age level. The lists were presented in 3 cycles of 3 lists per cycle, with a 
memory test following each cycle of 3 lists. On the memory test that followed each cycle of 
3 DRM lists, there were 19 test probes: Three words from each of the 3 lists, the 3 missing 
words (strong NS items), 1 word that was selected from among the 3 unpresented words for 
each list (weak NS items), and 4 words drawn from the 38 DRM lists that were not used as 
either study lists or as sources of items for the instructions and practice tests and were 
randomly selected for each subject in each experiment (ND items). The ND items were 
controls for well-known developmental differences in response bias (e.g., Brainerd & 
Mojardin, 1998). Thus, over the 3 cycles, the 3 test lists contained a total of 27 O words and 
30 new words (9 strong NS, 9 weak NS, and 12 ND).
Procedures.
Quiet rooms were set aside within participating schools, where the research was conducted. 
Each subject was randomly assigned to either the O? or NS? testing condition upon arrival 
and was informed that he/she would be exposed to a series of vocabulary lists, after which 
his/her memory would be tested. It is important to note that the same instructions and testing 
procedures were administered to all subjects at all age levels in Experiment 1 and also in 
Experiments 2–4. Hence, none of the developmental trends that we report can be due to age 
differences in the instructions or procedures that subjects of different ages received because 
there were none.
Reyna et al.
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Subjects sat at a computer and the experimenter sat nearby. Before any lists were presented, 
subjects heard the following instructions, via a computer audio recording: “In this study, you 
will first listen to some lists of vocabulary words. All of them are familiar words that you 
already know. The lists will be read slowly, one word at a time. Listen to the lists very 
carefully and pay attention to each word because later on, you will take a memory test. Do 
you have any questions?” The experimenter then answered any questions. Next, the 
computer played a recording of 3 12-word DRM lists, being read at a rate of 3 sec per item 
in a neutral voice with a 10 sec pause between lists. After the first cycle of lists, subjects 
listened to instructions for the first memory test.
As mentioned, instructions and procedures for matched O? and NS? conditions were 
developed by Brainerd and Reyna (1998) and have been used with children as young as age 
5. For subjects who were assigned to the O? condition, the instructions stressed that their 
task was to accept only old items that had appeared on the lists of vocabulary words. For 
subjects who were assigned to the NS? condition, the instructions stressed that their task was 
to accept only new words that had the same meaning as old words. The instructions for each 
condition provided subjects with multiple examples of the each of the three types of items 
that were to be accepted and rejected, which were drawn from short practice lists (four 
words) that were presented as part of the instructions.
Also as part of the instructions, subjects were required to pass a practice test to demonstrate 
their understanding and to show that they could apply the instructions on a memory test. 
Specifically, a short practice list was presented, after which 6 test probes (2 O items, 2 NS 
items, and 2 ND items) were presented. Subjects received feedback for their responses to 
each probe. Those who responded correctly to all test probes continued to the main memory 
test for their condition. Those who made one or more errors received a second practice list 
and a second practice test. Subjects who failed to perform perfectly on the second practice 
test were dropped from the experiment. Only three subjects had to be dropped, all of them 6-
year-olds.
The main memory test followed successful completion of the practice test. First, subjects 
listened to an audio recording of instructions that reminded them of how to respond by 
pressing the Y key on the computer keyboard for items that they wanted to accept or 
pressing the N key for items that they wanted to reject. Subjects then listened to a computer 
file of the test items being read in random order. The test was self-paced; the recording did 
not advance to the next item until subjects had responded Y or N to the current item. There 
were two more cycles of three DRM lists, followed by reminder test instructions, followed 
by a self-paced memory test. The practice test was eliminated from the instructional phase of 
the second and third cycles.
Results
Before reporting the results, we emphasize that it is always necessary to correct raw 
recognition data such as these for response bias, because as mentioned earlier, levels of yea-
saying bias vary developmentally. That was true in the present experiment because false 
alarm rates for ND items declined steadily with age in both testing conditions, 
demonstrating higher bias at younger age levels. The three most common methods of 
Reyna et al.
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

correcting data such as ours for response bias are the two-threshold statistic Pr and the signal 
detection statistics A′ and d′. (Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). These statistics usually produce 
the same qualitative results (Brainerd et al., 2015), and consequently, we only report results 
using the first correction method, Pr. This statistic has the conceptual virtue that corrected 
scores are probability values rather than dimensionless proportions (A′) or Gaussian random 
variables (d′). However, all of the statistical analyses that we report were also conducted for 
A′ and d′ scores, and none of the findings changed.
The mean bias-corrected correct response probabilities for O, strong NS, and weak NS items 
are reported in Table 2 for the O? and NS? conditions, and the ND false alarm rates that 
were used in making these corrections may be found in Table 3. As manipulation checks, 
notice that in the O? condition, the usual developmental reversal pattern is present for strong 
NS items, and that true memory (accepting O items) also increased between early childhood 
and adolescence. As another manipulation check, recall that even the youngest children 
understood the instructions and could execute them on memory tests because they could not 
participate in the main memory tests unless they performed perfectly on the practice test. 
Nevertheless, it might be thought that because the NS? instructions, are atypical, the 
youngest children might have been unable to execute them during the main tests. That 
hypothesis can be tested by comparing these children’s performance in the NS? condition 
versus the O? condition. Note that if 6-year-olds understood and could implement the 
instructions, the probability of accepting O items should be higher in the O? condition than 
in the NS? condition, whereas the opposite should be true for NS items. Both results were 
obtained. Six-year-olds’ acceptance rates for O items were p(O?) = .60 and p(NS?) = .43, 
t(32) = 3.92, p < .001, whereas their acceptance rates for weak NS items were p(O?) = .04 
and p(NS?) = .17, t(32) = 3.77, p < .001.
The important new findings can be seen in Figure 1A, where correct response probabilities 
in the O? condition (black data points) and the NS? condition (white data points) are plotted 
for both strong and weak NS items. It can be seen that the developmental trend for these 
false memory items is not the intuitive compensation pattern, in which NS accuracy would 
decline with age in both the O? and NS? conditions. Instead, it is the paradoxical 
complementarity pattern, in which accuracy simultaneously decreases (in the O? condition) 
and increases (in the NS? condition). In contrast, a different pattern can be seen in Figure 1B 
for O items. There, the intuitive compensation pattern is present: Memory for list words 
becomes more accurate with age in both conditions.
In order to test the complementarity pattern in Figure 1A for statistical reliability, we 
computed a 3 (age) X 2 (condition: O? vs. NS?) X 2 (type of item: strong NS vs. weak NS) 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) of bias-corrected correct response probabilities for NS items. 
The first two factors were between-subjects, and the third was within-subjects. If it is true 
that development is complementary for NS items but compensatory for O items, there will 
be an Age X Condition cross-over interaction. The specific form of this interaction must be 
that accuracy decreases with age in the O? condition, while it increases with age in the NS? 
condition. There was a robust cross-over of just that sort, F(2, 187) = 178.55, MSE = .06, 
ηp2 = .49. Post hoc tests (Tukey HSD) confirmed what is visually apparent in Figure 1A: In 
the O? condition, accuracy decreased reliably between the ages of 6 and 10 and between the 
Reyna et al.
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ages of 10 and 14, but in the NS? condition, accuracy increased reliably between the ages of 
6 and 10 and between the ages of 10 and 14. With development, then, subjects became better 
at correctly recognizing that NS items are new-similar, while they simultaneously become 
worse at correctly recognizing that NS items are not old. There was also a Condition X Type 
of Item interaction, F(1, 187) = 47.38, MSE = .03, ηp2 = .19. Here, post hoc tests revealed 
something that is also visually apparent in Figure 1A: Accuracy was higher for strong than 
for weak items in the NS? condition, but it was lower for strong than for weak items in the 
O? condition.
Turning to the statistical reliability of the developmental trend for O items (Figure 1B), 
recall that theory expects that items that were actually presented on lists will exhibit 
compensation rather than complementarity, for reasons that are concerned with verbatim 
memory: Memory for list words relies predominantly on verbatim traces, which are 
compensatory—for O items, they support correct acceptance of O? probes and correct 
rejection of NS? probes (see also Brainerd et al., 2015). It can be seen in Figure 1B that this 
prediction, too, was confirmed. Statistically, the patterns in Figure 1B mean that an Age X 
Condition ANOVA of performance on O items should produce a main effect of condition but 
not an Age X Condition cross-over because accuracy is simply improving with age in both 
the O? and NS? conditions. There was indeed a main effect for condition, F(1, 187) = 
230.49, MSE = .0, ηp2 = .55, p < .0001, and there was not an Age X Condition cross-over. 
There was an Age X Condition interaction of another sort, however, F(2, 187) = 20.83, MSE 
= .04, ηp2 = .22, p < .0001. It was a divergent fan in which the difference between p(O?) and 
p(NS?) was smaller for 6-year-olds than for 10-year-olds (Δ6 = .17 and Δ10 = .44) and was 
smaller for 10-year-olds than for 14-year0olds (Δ6 = .44 and Δ10 = .68). In short, with 
development, subjects became progressively better at remembering that O items are old, and 
that they are not new-similar, which means that the level of logical inconsistency is 
increasing.
Experiments 2–4
It is well established that the DRM illusion exhibits counterintuitive developmental reversals
—that with age, subjects make fewer correct responses to memory probes that ask whether 
NS items such as anger and cold are old. Beyond this, the results of Experiment 1 suggest 
that development is not logically consistent for such items either because, with age, subjects 
simultaneously make more correct responses to memory probes that ask whether these same 
items are new-similar. In Experiments 2–4, we attempted to replicate this paradoxical 
pattern, and for the sake of generality, to do so in experiments that varied the design of 
Experiment 1 in two basic ways.
The most significant variation involved the upper end of the age range that was studied. In 
Experiment 1, the subjects were children and adolescents. However, the developmental 
reversal effect has also been studied between adolescence and young adulthood (e.g., 
Odegard et al., 2008), and this counterintuitive effect continues to grow into the early adult 
years. It is obviously important to establish whether the same is true of the complementarity
—whether the age increase in correct responses when memory probes ask whether NS items 
are new-similar continues into young adulthood. It should, according to the theoretical 
Reyna et al.
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

distinctions that predicted the complementarity pattern. That prediction was based on the 
growth of gist memory, and it is well established that the ability to form meaning 
connections among items such as the words on DRM lists improves during the adolescent 
and the early adult years (e.g., Schneider & Pressley, 1997). To evaluate that possibility, we 
extended the age range of Experiment 1 upward to include young adults in Experiments 2–4.
The other design variation involved the method of presenting DRM lists. We implemented 
the standard oral method in Experiment 1, which results in the highest levels of false 
memory for NS items on O? probes (Gallo & Roediger, 2003). Other presentation methods 
that add visual supports to oral presentations are known to reduce false memory in adults. In 
particular, three methods of enriching oral presentations with visual supports are known to 
have this effect—namely, (a) pictures of objects and events named by list words (e.g., Howe, 
2006), (b) printed word stems for list words (e.g., Holliday, Brainerd, & Reyna, 2011), and 
(c) the full printed versions of list words (e.g., Gallo & Roediger, 2003). Two of these visual 
supports, pictures and word stems, have been investigated in developmental studies, and they 
are known to suppress false memory in children as well as adults (Holliday et al., 2011; 
Howe, 2006). They are also known to reduce the magnitude of developmental reversal 
effects (for a review see, Brainerd & Reyna, 2012). We used each of these methods in turn in 
Experiments 2–4. More specifically, the subjects once again received oral presentations of 
DRM lists, but now, they were accompanied by visual depictions (computer screen) of either 
a picture of the object or action that was named by each word (Experiment 2), a partial 
printed form of each word (e.g., SN__ for snow; Experiment 3), or the full printed form of 
each word (Experiment 4).
The motivation for this second design variation, like the first, was theoretical. Presentation 
formatting manipulations are of theoretical interest because they affect the types of 
memories that are stored. Because these visual support manipulations decrease the tendency 
to falsely accept O? probes for NS items, the traditional explanation is that they increase 
verbatim memory, relative to gist memory (Holliday et al., 2011). The fact that they shrink 
but do not eliminate developmental reversals is explained in the same way (Holliday et al., 
2011). This leads to an interesting prediction about subjects’ responses to NS items on 
complementary NS? probes. We saw that the theoretical distinctions that predict 
developmental reversals also say that verbatim memory can be used to correctly accept such 
probes (e.g., “Anger is definitely new because I clearly remember hearing mad, fear, and 
hate). Consequently, these visual support manipulations should increase correct acceptances 
of NS? probes as they decrease false acceptances of O? probes, especially at older age levels 
where both acceptance probabilities are high.
Method
Subjects.
A total of 607 subjects participated in these three experiments. The subjects in Experiment 2 
were 50 first-grade children (M = 6 years, 4 months), 50 fifth-grade children (M = 10 year, 
11 months), 50 ninth-grade adolescents (M = 14 years, 9 months), and 56 undergraduates (M 
= 20 years, 1 month). The subjects in Experiment 3 were 46 first-grade children (M = 6 
years, 8 months), 44 fifth-grade children (M = 10 years, 7 months), 49 ninth-grade 
Reyna et al.
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

adolescents (M = 14 years, 5 months), and 56 undergraduates (M = 20 years, 2 months). The 
subjects in Experiment 4 were 50 first-grade children (M = 6 year, 10 months), 50 fifth-
grade children (M = 10 y, 6 months), 50 ninth-grade adolescents (M = 14 years, 11 months), 
and 56 undergraduates (M = 20 50years, 10 months). The choice of sample size was based 
on a statistical power analysis of prior developmental DRM experiments that the authors 
have reported. The analysis showed that sample sizes of 40 per age level would yield a 
power of 1-β = .8 to detect moderate-sized effects for the between subjects factors of age 
and condition.
As in Experiment 1, the subjects at the three youngest age levels in Experiments 2–4 were 
recruited from public schools that served middleclass residential areas in the United 
Kingdom, and their participation was secured via letters of parental permission. The subjects 
at the oldest age level in these experiments were undergraduate volunteers who participated 
to fulfill a course requirement. As in Experiment 1, the subjects from each age level in 
Experiments 2–4 were randomly assigned to the O? or NS? condition, with the restriction 
that each condition should contain equal numbers of males and females. The research was 
classified as exempt by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Kent because it 
involved simple behavioral testing, which consisted of studying word lists and responding to 
yes/no memory questions.
Materials and procedures.
For the subjects at the three youngest age levels in these experiments, as in Experiment 1, 
the research was conducted in quiet rooms within their schools that had been designated for 
this purpose. For the adults in each experiment, the research was conducted in university 
laboratories. The materials and procedures for each experiment were the same as 
Experiment 1, except for two changes. The first was that during presentation of DRM lists, 
the oral administration procedure of Experiment 1 was supplemented with visual depictions 
of the items on a computer screen. As the subjects sat in front of the computer monitor 
listening to the DRM lists, they viewed visual depictions of the individual items, which were 
synchronized with the audio recordings. The subjects received the same general instructions 
as in Experiment 1 at the start of the experiment, but the instructions also informed them as 
to the nature of the depictions that they would view. In Experiment 2, the subjects were told 
they would view pictures of objects or actions referred to by each word. These were large 
pictures that appeared in the center of the screen. In Experiment 3, the subjects were told 
that they would view a few letters from the printed form each word, such as __ar, for fear. 
__te, for hate, and __mper for temper. These word stems were printed in lowercase 72-point 
font and centered on the screen. In Experiment 4, the subjects were told that they would 
view the full printed form of each word, which was presented in lowercase 72-point font, 
centered on the screen.
The second change was to reduce the length of the procedure. In Experiment 1, the subjects 
received three cycles of 3 DRM lists followed by a 25-item self-paced memory test (9 O, 3 
strong NS, 3 weak NS, 10 ND), for a total of 75 test items. At different points during the 
second half of the procedure, some of the youngest children stated that they were becoming 
fatigued. Although those children’s performance did not differ from that of other children, 
Reyna et al.
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

we decided to shorten the procedure to a single cycle of three DRM lists followed by a 
single self-paced memory test of 25 items. The 3 lists that were administered to individual 
subjects in these experiments were randomly selected from among the 12 lists that were 
used in Experiment 1. As before, subjects received the instructions that were appropriate to 
their condition, and they were administered a practice test, one on which perfect 
performance was required in order to proceed to the main memory test. That main memory 
tests were identical to Experiment 1.
Results
In Table 2, the mean bias-corrected correct response probabilities for O, strong NS, and 
weak NS items are reported for the O? and NS? conditions of Experiments 2–4. The ND 
false alarm probabilities that were used to make these bias corrections are reported in Table 
3. As manipulation checks, notice that in the O? condition of each experiment, the usual 
developmental reversal pattern is present for strong NS items (false alarms increase with 
age), and that true memory displays the usual developmental improvement (hit rates increase 
with age). As another manipulation check, it will be remembered that even the youngest 
children in each experiment understood the instructions and could execute them on memory 
tests because they were required to perform perfectly on practice tests before proceeding. 
Even the 6-year-olds were able to implement those instructions on the main memory test: A 
glance a Table 2 reveals that (a) they correctly accepted O items at higher rates in the O? 
condition than they incorrectly accepted them in the NS? condition, and (b) they incorrectly 
accepted weak NS items at lower rates in the O? condition than they correctly accepted them 
in the NS? condition.
The important new findings are displayed can be seen in Figure 2. There, correct response 
probabilities in the O? condition and the NS? condition have been plotted for both strong 
and weak NS items in Experiment 2 (panel A), Experiment 3 (panel B), and Experiment 4 
(panel C). It can be seen that as in Experiment 1, our intuition that the development of false 
memory will be compensatory across mutually incompatible reality states was violated. 
Instead, the paradoxical complementarity pattern, in which accuracy simultaneously 
decreases in the O? condition and increases in the NS? condition, was present in all three 
experiments. That is, with age, subjects become worse at rejecting the possibility that NS 
items are old but better at accepting the possibility that they are new-similar. In contrast, also 
as in Experiment 1, it can be seen in Figure 3 the O items exhibited the intuitive 
compensation pattern: Memory for O items became more accurate with development in both 
the O? and NS? conditions in all three experiments.
Because the developmental trends were different for NS versus O items, we report the 
statistical results for true and false memory separately. We begin with the false memory 
ANOVAs and then move on to parallel true memory ANOVAs.
False memory.
In each experiment, we tested the complementarity pattern in Figure 2 for statistical 
reliability by computing a 4 (age) X 2 (condition: O? vs. NS?) X 2 (type of item: strong NS 
vs. weak NS) ANOVA of bias-corrected correct response probabilities for NS items. It will 
Reyna et al.
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

be recalled that if development is complementary rather than compensatory, this ANOVA 
must yield an Age X Condition cross-over, such that accuracy decreases with age in the O? 
condition but increases with age in the NS? condition. There was a robust cross-over of this 
sort in all three experiments. The detailed results follow.
In Experiment 2, the Age X Condition X Type of Item ANOVA produced a main effect for 
condition, F(1, 197) = 71.75, MSE = .09, ηp2 = .27, p < .0001, and it also produce the 
crucial Age X Condition interaction, F(3, 197) = 60.76, MSE = .09, ηp2 = .44, p < .0001. 
Post hoc analysis (Tukey HSD) of the interaction confirmed the complementarity pattern 
that is suggested by the curves in Figure 2A. Specifically, accuracy decreased reliably 
between age 6 and young adulthood in the O? condition, but it increased reliably in the NS? 
condition. There was also a small Age X Condition X Type of Item interaction, F(3, 197) = 
4.05, MSE = .06, ηp2 = .06, p < .008. Post hoc analysis of that interaction revealed that the 
complementarity pattern was more pronounced for strong NS items that for weak NS items.
Turning to Experiment 3, the Age X Condition X Type of Item ANOVA produced a main 
effect for condition, F(1, 189) = 115.54, MSE = .10, ηp2 = .38, p < .0001, along with the 
crucial Age X Condition interaction, F(3, 189) = 36.52, MSE = .09, ηp2 = .37, p < .0001. 
Post hoc analysis of the interaction revealed what is obvious in in Figure 2B—namely, that 
accuracy decreased reliably between age 6 and young adulthood in the O? condition, but it 
increased reliably in the NS? condition. The Age X Condition X Type of Item interaction 
that was detected in Experiment 2 was not present in this experiment.
In Experiment 4, the Age X Condition X Type of Item ANOVA produced a main effect for 
condition, F(1, 196) = 55.87, MSE = .10, ηp2 = .22, p < .0001, plus the crucial Age X 
Condition interaction, F(3, 189) = 35.19, MSE = .10, ηp2 = .35 p < .0001. As in all prior 
experiments, post hoc analysis of the interaction revealed that accuracy decreased reliably 
between age 6 and young adulthood in the O? condition, but it increased reliably in the NS? 
condition. The small Age X Condition X Type of Item interaction in Experiment 2 was not 
detected in this experiment.
Finally, we mentioned that the three visual support manipulations should increase correct 
acceptances of NS? probes as they decrease false acceptances of O? probes, especially at 
older age level where false acceptance rates are high. We examined this prediction for the 
14-year-olds in Experiment 1 (the oldest age level in that experiment) and the 14-year-olds 
in these experiments. The data were consistent with it. The false acceptance probability for 
O? probes dropped from .75 in Experiment 1 to an average of .52 in Experiments 2–4, while 
the correct acceptance probability for NS? probes increased from .43 to an average of .55. 
Both changes were reliable.
Summing up, complementarity was the core finding about the development of false memory. 
In each experiment, for both strong and weak NS items, subjects became progressively 
better with age at correctly recognizing that NS items are new-similar, but they become 
progressive worse at correctly recognizing that NS items are not old. In addition, there was 
always a condition main effect. As can be seen in Figure 2, this was due to the fact that at all 
Reyna et al.
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ages, performance was more accurate on average in the NS? condition than in the O? 
condition.
True memory.
Next, we consider the statistical reliability of the developmental trends for O items that 
appear in Figure 3. We know that theory predicts that for items that were actually presented 
on DRM lists, subjects will exhibit compensation rather than complementarity. That was the 
pattern that was observed in all three experiments.
Inspection of the curves in Figure 3 suggests that (a) accuracy improved with age in both 
conditions, and (b) performance was more accurate on average in the O? condition than in 
the NS? condition. Consistent with a, 3(age) X 2 (condition) ANOVAs of the bias-corrected 
correct response probabilities produced a main effect for age in Experiment 2, F(3, 197) = 
12.00, MSE = .08, ηp2 = .15, p < .0001, in Experiment 3, F(3, 189) = 14.05, MSE = .05, ηp2 
= .18, p < .0001, and in Experiment 4, F(3, 196) = 8.61, MSE = .07, ηp2 = .12, p < .0001. 
Further, unlike the false memory ANOVAs, the Age X Condition interaction was not reliable 
in any of these experiments, which confirms compensation as the core developmental trend 
for true memory. Finally, there was also a main effect for condition in Experiment 2, F(1, 
197) = 23.04, MSE = .08, ηp2 = .11, p < .0001, in Experiment 3, F(1, 197) = 21.74, MSE = .
08, ηp2 = .18, p < .0001, and in Experiment 4, F(1, 196) = 29.83, MSE = .07, ηp2 = .13, p < .
0001.
In short, the developmental trend across all three experiments was the intuitive one for items 
that had actually been presented. Between early childhood and young adulthood, subjects 
became progressively better at recognizing that old items were old and that old items were 
not new-similar. This developmental growth in accuracy was comparable for the two types 
of remembering because the Age X Condition interaction was not reliable in any of the 
experiments.
General Discussion
In developmental studies of false memory, principal interest attaches to how accurately 
subjects of different ages perform on a single type of memory test for a focal class of items. 
The memory test asks subjects to remember old (O) items and avoid misremembering new 
items. The focal items are new-similar (NS) ones that preserve some of the salient content of 
O items, usually their meaning or some contextual details associated with their presentation. 
In our research, we shifted attention away from this conventional measure of false memory 
for NS items toward the developmental relation between false and true memory on tests for 
the logically incompatible old and new-similar reality states. We explored the possibility that 
this relation violates logical consistency, by exhibiting developmental complementarity 
rather than developmental compensation. Complementarity was observed with the types of 
NS items that are administered in the DRM illusion: The tendency to correctly remember 
them as being new-similar increased as the tendency to incorrectly remember them as old 
increased.
Reyna et al.
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

It is easier to appreciate just how contradictory this is by considering a concrete example 
that involves the three strong NS items in Table 1. On the one hand, suppose that we only 
have access to data from traditional old tests. If so, we would say those data show that anger, 
cold, and sleep are increasingly perceived as having been presented on DRM lists because 
they are increasingly accepted as old. This would be the obvious conclusion if only the 
lower curves in Figures 1A, 2A, 2B, and 2C were available. On the other hand, suppose that 
we only have access to data from new-similar tests. Now, we would say that anger, cold, and 
sleep are increasingly perceived as having not been presented on DRM lists because they are 
increasingly accepted as being new-similar. This would be the obvious conclusion if only the 
upper curves in Figures 1A, 2A, 2B, and 2C were available.
Because developmental complementarity is a paradoxical result, we sought to generate 
substantial evidence on whether this may pattern hold for the DRM illusion. Taken as a 
whole, our findings provide an existence proof of complementarity for this modal 
developmental reversal paradigm. In Experiment 1, we used the most common methodology 
for studying the DRM illusion, which is to present lists orally before administering memory 
tests. We found that between early childhood and mid-adolescence, subjects became 
progressively better at recognizing that strong and weak NS items are new-similar, but they 
simultaneously became worse at recognizing that the same items are not old. In Experiments 
2–4, we broadened the age range to include young adults, as well as 6-, 10-, and 14-year-
olds. We also varied the DRM methodology somewhat by adding three types of visual 
supports to oral presentations of lists (pictures, word stems, and full printed words), thereby 
providing a test of the generality of the complementarity pattern in Experiment 1. Visual 
supports did, indeed, weaken the DRM illusion. For example, among 14-year-olds in 
Experiment 1, the false acceptance rate on old tests for strong NS items was .74, whereas the 
corresponding acceptance rates for 14-year-olds in the last three experiments were .51, .46, 
and .48, respectively. Nevertheless, developmental complementarity was present in all three 
experiments, for both strong and weak NS items. A difference between the experiments is 
that complementarity was more marked for strong than for weak NS items in Experiments 1 
and 2 but not in Experiments 3 and 4. This may be due to differences among these 
experiments in presentation methods. It also may be due to range restriction, as overall levels 
of complementarity were lower in the last two experiments.
In addition to the amount of evidence, another factor that bears on our level of confidence 
was in the complementarity pattern is that it was not an accidental finding. Rather, this 
possibility was revealed by the same theoretical machinery that first predicted developmental 
reversals—namely, FTT’s distinctions between dissociated verbatim and gist traces of 
experience. Both types of representations are interpreted as signs of prior presentation on 
conventional old tests, but verbatim traces can suppress that tendency for new-similar items. 
FTT treats developmental reversals as situations in which improvements in gist memory 
increase the tendency to accept NS items as being old, and parallel improvements in 
verbatim memory are ineffective in suppressing this tendency (Brainerd et al., 2011). 
Another feature of gist, the one that points to complementarity, is that it is a 
noncompensatory form of memory that is congruent with incompatible reality states 
(Brainerd et al., 2015), so that developmental improvements in gist can lead to increased 
memory for mutually incompatible states.
Reyna et al.
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Beyond developmental complementarity for NS items, there is another striking 
complementarity prediction, which is about developmental trends in overall memory 
accuracy for the combined data of O and NS items. Based on the results of Experiments 1–4, 
overall accuracy for the combined data (a) should increase with age when subjects judge 
whether both types of items are new-similar but (b) should decrease with age when they 
judge whether these same items are old. For the two testing conditions, we define overall 
accuracy for O and NS items in the obvious way as pNS(NS?) ÷ [pO(NS?) + pNS(NS?)] 
when subjects judge whether these items are new-similar and as pO(O?) ÷ [pO(O?) + 
pNS(O?)] when subjects judge whether these items are old. pO(NS?) and pNS(NS?) are the 
probabilities of judging that O and NS items, respectively, are new-similar, whereas pO(O?) 
and pNS(O?) are the probabilities of judging that O and NS items, respectively, are old. 
Thus, for each testing condition, the overall accuracy measure is simply the hit rate divided 
by the hit rate plus the false alarm rate.
We already know that normal memory development can be complementary for NS items and 
compensatory for O items, and from that fact, overall accuracy for both types of items 
should decline when subjects judge whether these items are old but should improve when 
subjects judge whether these same items are new-similar. The results, pooled across the four 
experiments, are plotted in Figure 4. As expected, overall accuracy declines between early 
childhood and young adulthood when subjects judge whether both types of items are old, but 
overall accuracy improves during the same age range when subjects judge whether both 
types of items are new-similar. The key implication for understanding memory development 
is that whether the accuracy of children’s memories increases with age is not absolute but, 
rather, depends upon the reality state that they are asked to remember.
Next, we offer two suggestions about the direction of future research on developmental 
complementarity. The first is about the DRM illusion, and the second is about other 
developmental reversal paradigms. With respect to the DRM illusion, we focused on a 
simple empirical objective in our experiments, which was to generate a substantial amount 
of data that spanned the early childhood to young adulthood age range. That seemed to be 
the appropriate first step, considering that complementarity is such a counterintuitive 
possibility. This focus meant that there was no attempt to test theoretical explanations of 
complementarity via manipulations that targeted specific processes, such as children’s 
ability to extract the semantic content of DRM lists or preserve verbatim traces of list words. 
In view of the support for complementarity that emerged, attention can now turn to testing 
theoretical explanations. Because complementarity was predicted by the process distinctions 
that originally predicted developmental reversals, an obvious approach would be (a) to 
determine whether those particular processes are actually tied to variations in 
complementarity and perhaps (b) to determine whether the processes posited in other 
accounts of developmental reversals in the DRM illusion (e.g., Howe, 2006; Metzger et al., 
2008) are tied to variations in complementarity. Concerning b, we mentioned earlier that 
unlike FTT, these other accounts do not predict the complementarity phenomenon. However, 
it may be that proponents of those accounts will be able to elaborate their assumptions in 
order to explain complementarity after the fact. If that proves to be possible, it would be 
sensible to investigate whether complementarity varies as a function of the processes that are 
posited in those accounts.
Reyna et al.
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Turning to the second suggestion, we investigated complementarity in the context of the 
DRM illusion because it is by far the most widely studied example of developmental 
reversals. As noted earlier, however, there are several other examples that involve quite 
different procedures, including ones that focus on remembering emotional events. A key 
reason that such varied paradigms have been studied is that developmental reversals are 
counterintuitive, and hence, it is essential to determine whether they are confined to the 
DRM paradigm or whether they can be detected with other procedures that satisfy the two 
theoretical conditions that first predicted them. Obviously, the same point applies to 
developmental complementarity. Similar to the early years of research on developmental 
reversals, current evidence of developmental complementarity is confined to the DRM 
paradigm. Theoretically, complementarity may also occur with other paradigms that display 
developmental reversals. Whether it does is an open empirical question.
Finally, a measurement question should be briefly considered. In all of our experiments, the 
complementarity phenomenon was measured with a between-subjects procedure in which 
half the subjects judged whether test items were old and half judged whether the same items 
were new-similar. Readers may be wondering whether complementarity might not be 
observed with a comparable within-subjects procedure, in which each subject makes old 
judgments about half the items and new-similar judgments about the other half. Insofar as 
children and adolescent are concerned, this remains an open question. However, the answer 
for adults is known. Recently, we reported a series of experiments in which complementarity 
was studied with both the between- and within-subject procedures (Brainerd & Reyna, 
2018). The basic phenomenon was detected with both procedures, and indeed, the observed 
levels of complementarity were similar.
acknowledgement
The research reported in this article was supported by National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Aging) 
grant 1RC1AG036915 and National Institutes of Health (National Institute of Nursing Research) grant 
RO1NR014368–01.
References
Abadie M, Waroquier L, Terrier P (2017). The role of gist and verbatim memory in complex decision 
making: Explaining the unconscious thought effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 43, 604–705. 10.1037/xlm0000336.
Ackerman BP (1992). The sources of children’s source errors in judging causal inferences. Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 54, 90–119. 10.1016/0022-0965(92)90019-3.
Ackerman BP (1994). Children’s source errors in referential communication. Journal of Experimental 
Child Psychology, 58, 432–464. 464 10.1006/jecp.1994.1044.
Ackil JK, & Zaragoza MS (1998). Memorial consequences of forced confabulation: Age differences in 
susceptibility to false memories. Developmental Psychology, 34, 1358–1372. 10.1006/jecp.
1995.1031. [PubMed: 9823517] 
Binet A (1900). La suggestibilite. Paris: Schleicher Feres.
Barrouillet P (2015). Theories of cognitive development: From Piaget to today. Developmental 
Review, 38, 1–12. 10.1016/j.dr.2015.07.004.
Bjorklund DF (Ed.), (2000). False memory creation in children and adults. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bjorklund DF, Bjorklund BR, & Brown RD (1998). Children’s susceptibility to repeated questions: 
How misinformation changes children’s answers and their minds. Applied Developmental Science, 
2, 99–111. 10.1207/s1532480xads0202_4.
Reyna et al.
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Bjorklund DF, & Hock HH (1982). Age differences in the temporal locus of memory organization in 
children’s recall. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 33, 347–362. 
10.1016/0022-0965(82)90025-X.
Bjorklund DF, & Muir JE (1988). Children’s development of free recall memory: Remembering on 
their own. Annals of Child Development, 5, 79–123.
Bouwmeester S, & Verkoeijen PPJL (2010). Latent variable modeling of cognitive processes in true 
and false recognition of words: A developmental perspective. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 139, 365–381. 10.1016/j.dr.2006.08.001. [PubMed: 20438256] 
Brainerd CJ, & Gordon LL (1994). Development of verbatim and gist memory for numbers. 
Developmental Psychology, 30, 163–177. 10.1037/0012-1649.30.2.163.
Brainerd CJ, Holliday RE, Reyna VF, Yang Y, & Toglia MP (2010). Developmental reversals in false 
memory: Effects of emotional valence and arousal. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 
107, 137–154. 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00689.x. [PubMed: 20547393] 
Brainerd CJ, & Mojardin AH (1998). Children’s spontaneous false memories for narrative statements: 
Long-term persistence and mere testing effects. Child Development, 69, 1361–1377. 
10.2307/1132271. [PubMed: 9839421] 
Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (1998). Fuzzy-trace theory and children’s false memories. Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 71, 81–129. 10.1006/jecp.1998.2464. [PubMed: 9843617] 
Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2012). Reliability of children’s testimony in the era of developmental 
reversals. Developmental Review, 32, 224–267. 10.1016/j.dr.2012.06.008. [PubMed: 23139439] 
Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2018). Complementarity in false memory illusions. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General. 147, 305–327. 10.1037/xge0000381. [PubMed: 29154619] 
Brained CJ, Reyna VF, & Forrest TJ (2002). Are young children susceptible to the false memory 
illusion? Child Development, 73, 1363–1377. 10.1111/1467-8624.00477. [PubMed: 12361306] 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, & Holliday RE (2012). Development of recollection: A fuzzy-trace theory 
perspective In Ghetti S & Bauer PJ (Eds.), Origins and development of recollection: Perspectives 
from psychology and neuroscience (pp. 101–143). New York: Oxford University Press.
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, & Zember E (2011). Theoretical and forensic implications of developmental 
studies of the DRM illusion. Memory & Cognition, 39, 365–380. 10.3758/s13421-010-0043-2. 
[PubMed: 21264595] 
Brainerd CJ, Stein L, & Reyna VF (1998). On the development of conscious and unconscious memory. 
Developmental Psychology, 34, 342–357. 10.1037//0012-1649.34.2.342. [PubMed: 9541786] 
Brainerd CJ, Wang Z, Reyna VF, & Nakamura K (2015). Episodic memory does not add up: 
Verbatim–gist superposition predicts violations of the additive law of probability. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 84, 224–245. 10.1016/j.jml.2015.06.006. [PubMed: 26236091] 
Bruck M, Ceci SJ, Francoeur E, & Barr R (1995). I hardly cried when I got my shot: Influencing 
children’s reports about a visit to their pediatrician. Child Development, 66, 193–208. 10.1111/j.
1467-8624.1995.tb00865.x. [PubMed: 7497825] 
Bruer KC, & Pozzulo JD (2014). Familiarity and recall memory for environments: A comparison of 
children and adults. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 35, 318–325. 10.1016/
j.appdev.2014.05.002
Carneiro P, Albuquerque P, Fernandez A, & Esteves F (2007). Analyzing false memories in children 
with associative lists specific for their age. Child Development, 78, 1171–1185. 10.1111/j.
1467-8624.2007.01059.x. [PubMed: 17650132] 
Carneiro P, & Fernandez A, (2010). Age differences in the rejection of false memories: The effects of 
giving warning instructions and slowing the presentation rate. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 105, 81–97. 10.1016/j.jecp.2009.09.004. [PubMed: 19875129] 
Ceci SJ, & Bruck M (1998). The ontogeny and durability of true and false memories: A dual trace 
account. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 71, 165–169. 10.1037/0033-2909.113.3.403. 
[PubMed: 9843621] 
Ceci SJ, Papierno PD, & Kulkofksy S (2007). Representational constraints on children’s suggestibility. 
Psychological Science, 18, 503–509. 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01930.x. [PubMed: 17576263] 
Reyna et al.
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Connolly DA, & Price HL (2006). Children’s suggestibility for an instance of a repeated event versus a 
unique event: The effect of degree of association between variable details. Journal of Experimental 
Child Psychology, 93, 207–223. 10.1016/j.jecp.2005.06.004. [PubMed: 16111696] 
Deese J (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of certain verbal intrusions in free recall. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 58, 17–22. 10.1037/h0046671. [PubMed: 13664879] 
Dewhurst SA, Pursglove RC, & Lewis C (2007). Story contexts increase susceptibility to the DRM 
illusion in 5-year-olds. Developmental Science, 10, 374–378. 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00592.x. 
[PubMed: 17444977] 
Dewhurst SA, & Robinson CA (2004). False memories in children: Evidence for a shift from 
phonological to semantic associations. Psychological Science, 15, 782–786. 10.1111/j.
0956-7976.2004.00756.x. [PubMed: 15482451] 
Fazio LK, & Marsh EJ (2008). Older, not younger, children learn more false facts from stories. 
Cognition, 106, 1081–1089. 10.1016/j.cognition.2007.04.012. [PubMed: 17540354] 
Fernandez-Dols JM, Carrera P, Barchard KA, & Gacitua M (2008). False recognition of facial 
expressions of emotion: Causes and implications. Emotion, 8, 530–539. 10.1037/a0012724. 
[PubMed: 18729583] 
Gallo DA, & Roediger HL, III (2002). Variability among word lists in eliciting memory illusions: 
evidence for associative activation and monitoring. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 469–
497. 10.1016/S0749-596X(02)00013-X.
Gerlach W, & Stern O (1922). Das magnetische moment des silberatoms. Zeitschrift fur Physik, 9, 
353–355. 10.1007/BF01326984
Goodman GS, Ogle CM, Block SD, Harris LS, Larson RP, Augusti EM, et al. (2011). False memory 
for trauma-related Deese–Roediger–McDermott lists in adolescents and adults with histories of 
child sexual abuse. Development and Psychopathology, 23, 71–86. 10.1017/S0954579411000150.
Goodman GS, Quas JA, Batterman-Faunce JM, Riddlesberger MM, & Kuhn J (1994). Predictors of 
accurate and inaccurate memories of traumatic events experienced in childhood. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 3, 269–294. 10.1006/ccog.1994.1016.
Holliday RE, Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2009, 4). Effects of arousal and valence on children’s true 
and false memories. Paper presented at Society for Research in Child Development, Denver, CO.
Holliday RE, Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2011). Developmental Reversals in False Memory: Now you 
see them, now you don’t! Developmental Psychology, 47, 442–449. 10.1037/a0021058. [PubMed: 
21142371] 
Howe ML (2005). Children (but not adults) can inhibit false memories. Psychological Science, 16, 
927–931. 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2005.01638.x. [PubMed: 16313654] 
Howe ML (2006). Developmentally invariant dissociations in children’s true and false memories: Not 
all relatedness is created equal. Child Development, 77, 1112–1123. 10.1111/j.
1467-8624.2006.00922.x. [PubMed: 16942509] 
Howe ML (2007). Children’s emotional false memories. Psychological Science, 18, 856–860. 
10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01991.x. [PubMed: 17894601] 
Klemfuss JZ, & Ceci SJ (2012). Legal and psychological perspectives on children’s competence to 
testify in court. Developmental Review, 32, 268–286. 10.1016/j.dr.2012.06.005..
Lampinen JM, Leding JK, Reed KB, & Odegard TN (2006). Global gist extraction in children and 
adults. Memory, 14, 952–964. 10.1080/09658210601008957. [PubMed: 17077030] 
Lampinen JM, & Odegard TN (2006). Memory editing mechanisms. Memory, 14, 649–654. 
10.1080/09658210600648407. [PubMed: 16829484] 
Lyons KE, Ghetti S, & Cornoldi C (2010). Age differences in the contribution of recollection and 
familiarity to false-memory formation: A new paradigm to examine developmental reversals. 
Developmental Science, 13, 355–362. 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00889. [PubMed: 20136932] 
Metzger RL, Warren AR, Price JD, Reed AW, Shelton J, & Williams D (2008). Do children “D/R-M” 
like adults? False memory production in children. Developmental Psychology, 44, 169–181. 
10.1037/0012-1649.44.1.169. [PubMed: 18194015] 
Odegard TN, Holliday RE, Brainerd CJ, & Reyna VF (2008). Attention to global-gist processing 
eliminates age effects in false memories. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 99, 96–113. 
10.1016/j.jecp.2007.08.007. [PubMed: 17950306] 
Reyna et al.
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Otgaar H, Howe M ., Brackmann N, & Smeets T (2016). The malleability of developmental trends in 
neutral and negative memory illusions. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145, 31–55. 
10.1037/xge0000127. [PubMed: 26709588] 
Otgaar H, Peters M, & Howe ML (2012). Dividing attention lowers children’s but increases adults’ 
false memories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 204–
210. 10.1037/a0025160.
Paz-Alonso PM, Ghetti S, Donohue SE, Goodman GS, & Bunge SA (2008). Neurodevelopmental 
correlates of true and false recognition. Cerebral Cortex, 18, 2208–2216. 10.1093/cercor/bhm246. 
[PubMed: 18203693] 
Pipe ME, Gee S, Wilson JC, & Egerton JM (1999). Children’s recall 1 or 2 years after an event. 
Developmental Psychology, 35, 781–789. 10.1037/0012-1649.35.3.781. [PubMed: 10380868] 
Poole DA, & Lindsay DS (1995). Interviewing preschoolers: Effects of nonsuggestive techniques, 
parental coaching, and leading questions on reports of nonexperienced events. Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 60, 129–154. 10.1006/jecp.1995.1035.
Poole DA, & White LT (1991). Effects of question repetition on the eyewitness testimony of children 
and adults. Developmental Psychology, 27, 975–986. 10.1037/0012-1649.27.6.975.
Principe GF, Guiliano S, & Root C (2008). Rumor mongering and remembering: How rumors 
originating in children’s inferences can affect memory. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 
99, 135–155. 10.1016/j.jecp.2007.10.009. [PubMed: 18155719] 
Reyna VF, & Brainerd CJ (2011) Dual processes in decision making and developmental neuroscience: 
A fuzzy-trace model. Developmental Review, 31, 180–206. 10.1016/j.dr.2011.07.004. [PubMed: 
22096268] 
Reyna VF, & Kiernan B (1995). Children’s memory and interpretation of psychological metaphors. 
Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 10, 309–331. 10.1207/s15327868ms1004_5.
Roediger HL, III, & McDermott KB (1995). Creating false memories: Remembering words not 
presented on lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 
803–814. 10.1037/0278-7393.21.4.803.
Roediger HL, III, Watson JM, McDermott KB, & Gallo DA (2001). Factors that determine false recall: 
A multiple regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 385–405. 10.3758/
BF03196177. [PubMed: 11700893] 
Schneider W & Ornstein PA (2015). The development of children’s memory. Child Development 
Perspectives, 9, 190–195. 10.1111/cdep.12129.
Schneider W, & Pressley M (1997). Memory development between 2 and 20. Mawah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sloutsky VM, & Fisher AV (2004). When development and learning decrease memory. Psychological 
Science, 15, 553–558. 10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00718.x. [PubMed: 15271001] 
Snodgrass JG, & Corwin J (1988). Pragmatics of measuring recognition memory: Applications to 
dementia and amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 34–50. 
10.1037/0096-3445.117.1.34. [PubMed: 2966230] 
Sugrue K, & Hayne H (2006). False memories produced by children and adults in the DRM paradigm. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 625–631. 10.1002/acp.1214.
Weekes BS, Hamilton S, Oakhill J, & Holliday RE (2007). False recollection in children with reading 
comprehension difficulties. Cognition, 106, 222–233. 10.1016/j.cognition.2007.01.005. [PubMed: 
17349990] 
Reyna et al.
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
Developmental complementarity in memory accuracy for new-similar (NS) items (Panel A) 
and developmental compensation in memory accuracy for old (O) items (Panel B) in the 
DRM illusion in Experiment 1. O? = the old recognition condition, and NS? = the new-
similar recognition condition.
Reyna et al.
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
Developmental complementarity in memory accuracy for NS items in the DRM illusion. 
Accuracy declines with age when subjects judge whether these items are old (O?), but it 
improves with age when they judge whether these items are NS (NS?). Experiment 2 = 
Panel A, Experiment 3 = Panel B, and Experiment 4 = Panel C.
Reyna et al.
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
Developmental compensation in memory accuracy for old (O) items in the DRM illusion. 
Accuracy increases with age regardless of whether subjects judge whether O items are old 
(O?) or new-similar (NS?). Experiment 2 = Panel A, Experiment 3 = Panel B, and 
Experiment 4 = Panel C.
Reyna et al.
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. 
Complementary developmental trends in net memory accuracy when subjects judge whether 
old items and new-similar items are old (black dots) versus when they judge whether the 
same items are new-similar (white squares). The net accuracy of old judgments is the 
probability of correctly recognizing list items as old divided by the sum of that probability 
and the probability of incorrectly recognizing new-similar items as old. The net accuracy of 
new-similar judgments is the probability of correctly recognizing new-similar items as new-
similar divided by the sum of that probability and the probability of incorrectly recognizing 
list items as new-similar.
Reyna et al.
Page 24
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Reyna et al.
Page 25
Table 1
Experimental materials and standard procedures for the Deese/Roediger/McDermott illusion
Old list words (O)
New-similar words (NS)
New-different words (ND)
hot, snow, warm, winter, ...
cold (strong), frost (weak)
city, music
rest, awake, tired, dream, ...
sleep (strong), yawn (weak)
cold, soft
mad, fear, hate, temper, ...
anger (strong), mean (weak)
spider, thief
Note. Subjects study short word lists composed of related items, such as those in the left hand column, and they respond to a recognition test on 
which three types of test probes are presented: old (O) list words, new-similar (NS) words, and new-different (ND) words. For each test probe, the 
subjects’ task is to decide whether it is O.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Reyna et al.
Page 26
Table 2
Mean bias-corrected correct response probabilities (SDs in parentheses) in the old (O?) and new-similar (NS?) 
memory test conditions of Experiments 1–4
Age level/memory test condition
Test items
6 years
10 years
14 years
Adult
O?
NS?
O?
NS?
O?
NS?
O?
NS?
Experiment 1
Old items
.60 (.15)
.56 (.29)
.72 (.14)
.72 (.22)
.79 (.09)
.86 (.13)
.59 (.22)
.25 (.24)
.33 (.18)
.31 (.24)
.25 (.13)
.43 (.29)
.92 (.09)
.19 (.20)
.84 (.13)
.37 (.19)
.68 (.18)
.55 (.17)
Experiment 2
Old items
.57 (.34)
.47 (.26)
.69 (.27)
.46 (.29)
.83 (.21)
.65 (.42)
.92 (.09)
.68 (.22)
.82 (..21)
.19 (.26)
.70 (.30)
.32 (.30)
.49 (.34)
.51 (.24)
.25 (.18)
.80 (.20)
.93 (.18)
.14 (.24)
.76 (.25)
.24 (.34)
.67 (.34)
.29 (.36)
.57 (.32)
.61 (.28)
Experiment 3
Old items
.55 (.25)
.49 (.22)
.70 (.22)
.53 (.32)
.85 (.11)
.66 (.26)
.83 (.14)
.67 (.15)
.88 (.12)
.09 (.23)
.72 (.26)
.26 (.24)
.54 (.30)
.47 (.22)
.38 (.25)
.65 (.29)
.83 (.29)
.05 (.24)
.69 (.36)
.23 (.35)
.68 (.36)
.29 (.34)
.51 (.36)
.47 (.36)
Experiment 4
Old items
.66 (.24)
.48 (.27)
.71 (.33)
.47 (.27)
.78 (.19)
.60 (.31)
.87 (.11)
.71 (.22)
.80 (.32)
.19 (.21)
.64 (.31)
.45 (.31)
.52 (.32)
.62 (.27)
.31 (.26)
.69 (.24)
.85 (.23)
.05 (.15)
.75 (.31)
.20 (.27)
.67 (.34)
.44 (.33)
.52 (.34)
.50 (.32)
Note. Old items appeared on the DRM lists, whereas strong new-similar items and weak-new similar items did not appear on DRM lists. The O? 
and NS? testing conditions ask, respectively, whether a test item is an old list item and whether it is a new-similar item. In the O? testing condition, 
the correct response is acceptance for old items but rejection for strong new-similar items and weak-new similar items. In the NS? testing condition, 
the correct response is rejection for old items but acceptance for strong new-similar items and weak-new similar items. The correct response 
probabilities for old, strong new-similar, and weak new-similar test items have been corrected for yea-saying bias with the two-high-threshold 
method.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Reyna et al.
Page 27
Table 3
Mean false alarm probabilities (SDs in parentheses) for new-different items in the old (O?) and new-similar 
(NS?) memory test conditions of Experiments 1–4
Age level/memory test condition
Experiment
6 years
10 years
14 years
Adult
O?
NS?
O?
NS?
O?
NS?
O?
NS?
Experiment 1
.14 (.12)
.14 (.17)
.04 (.06)
.17 (.11)
.01 (.03)
.12 (.13)
Experiment 2
.09 (.14)
.12 (.12)
.09 (.12)
.07 (.13)
.02 (.06)
.07 (.12)
.04 (.07)
.01 (.03)
Experiment 3
.12 (.16)
.10 (.16)
.06 (.12)
.09 (.11)
.05 (.10)
.07 (.11)
.01 (.05)
.01 (.03)
Experiment 4
.09 (.14)
.12 (.12)
.11 (.12)
.08 (.13)
.02 (.06)
.18 (.24)
.03 (.07)
.01 (.02)