False memories with age: neural and cognitive underpinnings
Aleea L. Devitt1 and Daniel L. Schacter1
1Department of Psychology, Harvard University, MA, USA
Abstract
As we age we become increasingly susceptible to memory distortions and inaccuracies. Over the 
past decade numerous neuroimaging studies have attempted to illuminate the neural underpinnings 
of aging and false memory. Here we review these studies, and link their findings with those 
concerning the cognitive properties of age-related changes in memory accuracy. Collectively this 
evidence points towards a prominent role for age-related declines in medial temporal and 
prefrontal brain areas, and corresponding impairments in associative binding and strategic 
monitoring. A resulting cascade of cognitive changes contributes to the heightened vulnerability to 
false memories with age, including reduced recollective ability, a reliance on gist information and 
familiarity-based monitoring mechanisms, as well as a reduced ability to inhibit irrelevant 
information and erroneous binding of features between memory traces. We consider both 
theoretical and applied implications of research on aging and false memories, as well as questions 
remaining to be addressed in future research.
Keywords
False memory; Memory distortion; Aging; Memory; Memory accuracy
1. Introduction
It is well-established that cognitive aging is associated with declines in the amount of 
material remembered across a range of encoding conditions, items, and retrieval tasks 
(Balota et al., 2000; Hoyer and Verhaeghen, 2006; Park et al., 2002). However, it is now also 
well known that what is remembered tends to be less accurate with age. Older adults exhibit 
an enhanced susceptibility to a wide range of memory errors and source misattributions, 
including familiarity-based errors (e.g., Jacoby, 1999), gist-based errors (e.g., Koutstaal & 
Schacter, 1997), conjunction errors (e.g., Castel & Craik, 2003), false memories for self-
relevant information (Rosa and Gutchess, 2013), imagination inflation (e.g., McDaniel et al., 
2008), and misinformation (Wylie et al., 2014). In recent years there has been great interest 
Corresponding author: Aleea L. Devitt, Harvard University, Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, 
USA, aldevitt@gmail.com. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
Neuropsychologia. 2016 October ; 91: 346–359. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.08.030.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in elucidating the neural and cognitive underpinnings of this age-related increase in 
vulnerability to false memories.
There have been a number of previous reviews on the general topic of aging and false 
memory (cf., Jacoby & Rhodes, 2006; Koutstaal & Schacter, 2001; Pierce et al., 2004; 
Schacter et al., 1997), but none within the past decade, despite extensive research activity. 
Moreover, the earlier reviews of aging and false memory focused almost exclusively on 
evidence from cognitive/behavioral studies, in part because the preponderance of evidence 
available at the time these reviews were written came from such studies. However, during 
the past decade there has been a notable increase in neuroimaging studies of aging and false 
memory, allowing at least preliminary links to be made between the cognitive and neural 
processes associated with various kinds of age-related memory errors. The main purposes of 
the present paper are to review and link experimental evidence concerning the cognitive 
properties of changes in memory accuracy with age, and neuroimaging evidence concerning 
their neural underpinnings, focusing primarily on research from the past decade.
More specifically, we suggest that age-related increases in false memories are to a large 
extent attributable to changes in the medial temporal lobes (MTL) and prefrontal cortex 
(PFC), and corresponding impairments in recollection and executive functioning. Recent 
research has endeavored to link specific aspects of memory, executive functions, and related 
processes with specific subregions within the MTL and PFC (for reviews, see Passingham & 
Wise, 2012; Poppenk et al., 2013; Preston & Eichenbaum, 2013; Zeidman & Maguire, 
2016). Thus, when we refer broadly to MTL and PFC in relation to age-related changes in 
memory, we are aware that we are referring to large brain regions containing multiple 
subregions that may serve distinct functions. In the course of the review, we consider 
evidence linking specific MTL and PFC regions with specific processes and functions 
associated with age-related increases in false memories, although as we note at the 
conclusion of the review, relatively little solid evidence currently exists regarding this 
important issue.
We begin by reviewing evidence linking changes in the MTL and PFC to age-related 
memory changes. Next, we consider how these neural changes produce an increased 
susceptibility to false memories, focusing on several candidate cognitive underpinnings: 
binding failures, gist-based processing, deficits in strategic retrieval, overreliance on 
familiarity, disinhibition and hyper-binding. Finally, we conclude by considering theoretical 
and applied implications of research on aging and false memory, as well as open questions 
and possible future research directions.
2. Medial temporal lobe and prefrontal cortex changes with aging
Converging evidence from lesion and neuroimaging studies has identified the MTL 
(particularly the hippocampus) and PFC as brain structures critical to episodic memory 
encoding and retrieval (e.g., Simons & Spiers, 2003). These two regions are also 
disproportionally affected by age-related structural and functional decline (Buckner, 2004; 
Buckner et al., 2006; Hedden and Gabrieli, 2004; Moscovitch and Winocur, 1995; Nugent et 
al., 2014; Prull et al., 2000; Raz et al., 2005; West, 1996). The PFC is also thought to 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

compensate for declines in cognitive resources elsewhere in the brain (such as the MTL), 
further taxing functioning of this region with age (Cabeza, 2002; Cabeza et al., 2002; Grady 
et al., 2003; Persson et al., 2006).
Both MTL and PFC dysfunction have been directly linked with memory impairments. 
Decreased hippocampal volume is associated with reduced memory performance both cross-
sectionally (Driscoll et al., 2003) and longitudinally (Persson et al., 2012, 2006; Tisserand et 
al., 2004). Moreover, reduced functional activation of the hippocampus during memory 
encoding and retrieval is commonly observed with age (e.g., Dennis et al., 2007, 2008; 
Giovanello et al., 2010; Grady et al., 1995; Persson et al., 2012). Functional and structural 
decline in anterior, dorsolateral and ventrolateral PFC is also associated with reduced 
memory ability (Fandakova et al., 2014; Tisserand et al., 2004). Indeed, older adults often 
perform similarly to patients with lesions to lateral PFC, as well as other PFC subregions, on 
memory tests (cf., Janowsky et al., 1989; Schacter et al., 1991; Stuss et al., 1996; Swick et 
al., 2006).
Declines in MTL and PFC structure and function are also linked with an enhanced 
susceptibility to false memories. Younger and older adults with poor performance on 
behavioral tests reliant on MTL functioning are more likely to falsely identify lure items on 
the basis of semantic relatedness or familiarity with studied items (Fandakova et al., 2013b; 
Plancher et al., 2009; Rubin et al., 1999; see also Zhu et al., 2010), though the evidence for 
this relationship is mixed (McCabe et al., 2009). Likewise, performance on executive 
functioning tests sensitive to frontal functioning (particularly dorsolateral and superior 
medial PFC; see Stuss et al., 1998, 2000, 2001; Troyer et al., 1998) is associated with 
deficits in monitoring the source of incoming information for both younger and older adults 
(Chan & McDermott, 2007; Craik et al., 1990; Fandakova et al., 2013a; Glisky et al., 2001; 
Henkel et al., 1998; Pansky et al., 2009; Plancher et al., 2009; Roediger & Geraci, 2007; 
Rubin et al., 1999; Sauzéon et al., 2016). Highlighting the considerable heterogeneity in 
cognitive aging, older adults with preserved executive functioning are no more susceptible to 
false alarms than college students (Butler et al., 2004; Meade et al., 2012; though see 
Lindner & Davidson, 2014).
Neuroimaging studies substantiate the relationship between MTL and PFC integrity and 
false memory susceptibility. Older adults with a smaller hippocampal volume make more 
false alarms in an associative recognition task compared to older adults with a larger volume 
(Shing et al., 2011). During correct rejection of lure stimuli, older adults activate the 
hippocampus less than younger adults (Tsukiura et al., 2014). While dorsolateral PFC 
recruitment scales with retrieval monitoring demands for younger adults, older adults show 
greater recruitment of this region regardless of the amount of retrieval monitoring required, 
potentially reflecting a breakdown in the functional specialization of PFC activation 
(McDonough et al., 2013; see also Gutchess et al., 2007). Increased PFC activation may also 
be compensatory during memory monitoring; older adults performing highly on a memory 
test recruit additional right middle and medial superior frontal areas when making 
recognition judgments, compared to low-performing older adults (Gutchess et al., 2007). 
Moreover, those older adults displaying a younger adult-like pattern of activation during 
correct rejection of conjunction lures – specifically recruitment of a frontoparietal network – 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

are less prone to false alarm to novel combinations of familiar elements (Fandakova et al., 
2015).
In addition to regional declines, a reduction in the functional connectivity between PFC and 
MTL regions is observed with healthy aging (Andrews-Hanna et al., 2007; St. Jacques et al., 
2012). An interactive and collaborative relationship between these regions exists to 
successfully store and recall an episode from memory (McClelland et al., 1995; Preston and 
Eichenbaum, 2013; Schlichting and Preston, 2015; Simons and Spiers, 2003). The MTL 
system is thought to be reflexive, in that it encodes and retrieves without much control over 
the input or organization of information. As such, the frontal cortex provides encoding and 
retrieval support for the MTL, controlling the delivery and organization of information, 
guiding search attempts, and monitoring recalled information (cf. Working with Memory 
model; Moscovitch & Winocur, 2002). Thus the connective integrity of these two regions is 
vital for accurate memory encoding and retrieval. Indeed, Fandakova and colleagues (2015) 
demonstrated that older adults exhibiting strong functional connectivity of left anterior PFC 
and temporal areas (including the parahippocampus and middle temporal gyrus) perform 
better on tests of executive functioning, use strategic encoding mechanisms, and are less 
prone to memory distortions. Moreover, when correctly rejecting lure stimuli, older adults 
exhibit decreased interaction of PFC regions involved in source monitoring (specifically 
ventral PFC) and regions that cooperate with the hippocampus to aid recollection 
(supramarginal gyrus), implicating a disconnect in monitoring and recall processes with age 
(Tsukiura et al., 2014).
3. Mechanisms of false memory formation with age
While it is clear that MTL and PFC declines play a role in the age-related increase in 
memory errors, it is critical to understand how this dysfunction may result in enhanced 
susceptibility to false memories. Monitoring the source of memory output requires 
informative cues to be encoded and retrieved – processes reliant on hippocampal binding, as 
well as attention and memory organization mechanisms mediated by various PFC 
subregions. In this section we argue that declines in MTL and PFC contribute to binding and 
strategic monitoring deficits, creating a cascade of cognitive changes that increase 
opportunities for false memories to occur. More specifically, we suggest that:
1.
Binding failures result in an impoverished memory trace devoid of 
distinctive source information, which may be misattributed to an incorrect 
source. Recollective declines also increase phenomenological and neural 
overlap between memories of differing origins.
2.
Unsuccessful separation of memory traces encourages source decisions 
based on gist, or the overall similarities of memory traces, rather than 
item-specific information.
3.
Even when source information is encoded sufficiently, declines in strategic 
retrieval processes mean this information may not be effectively utilized to 
determine memory origin.
Devitt and Schacter
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

4.
Reductions in recollective information and declines in strategic monitoring 
necessitate a reliance on misleading familiarity-based processes.
5.
Declines in inhibitory processes may enhance distraction and formation of 
spurious associations between incoming information.
A more comprehensive discussion of each of these mechanisms follows.
3.1. Binding failures
The associative deficit hypothesis posits that age-related hippocampal decline results in a 
specific deficit in encoding and retrieving relations between items, more so than item 
information itself (Bender et al., 2010; Chalfonte and Johnson, 1996; Cohn et al., 2008; 
Kessels et al., 2007; Naveh-Benjamin, 2000; Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2003; Old and Naveh-
Benjamin, 2008; Spencer and Raz, 1995). The hippocampus plays a vital role in associative 
memory, particularly in binding memory features during encoding (e.g., Davachi et al., 
2003; Giovanello et al., 2004; Jackson & Schacter, 2004; Kirwan & Stark, 2004; Ranganath, 
2010). This feature binding is critical for pattern completion, where activation of a subset of 
features comprising an event spreads to activate the remaining features at retrieval 
(McClelland et al., 1995; Nakazawa et al., 2002; Teyler & Rudy, 2007; see Schacter et al., 
1998). Indeed, hippocampal damage results in deficits in both the formation and retrieval of 
memory relations (e.g., Hannula et al., 2006; Pertzov et al., 2013). In line with an 
associative-specific deficit, age reductions in hippocampal recruitment are most prominent 
when feature binding is required (Dennis et al., 2008a; Mitchell et al., 2000).
The PFC also contributes to the strategic encoding of relational information (e.g., Cabeza, 
2006). Associative declines have been linked to reduced dorsolateral and ventrolateral PFC 
volume (Becker et al., 2015; see also Blumenfeld et al., 2011), ventrolateral PFC 
dysfunction has been associated with impaired relational encoding in older adults (Addis et 
al., 2014), and age-related reductions in dorsolateral PFC recruitment are observed during 
successful encoding of associative, but not item information (Dennis et al., 2008a). 
Crucially, poor binding ability is linked with an enhanced susceptibility to false memories in 
both younger and older adults, including conjunction errors (Fandakova et al., 2013a) and 
gist-based errors (Henkel et al., 1998). As we discuss in detail below, inefficient binding of 
content and source, and a subsequent loss of distinctive information, may also contribute to 
source misattributions based on misinformation and imagination inflation.
3.1.1. Inefficient binding of content and source—The source monitoring framework 
suggests that specific characteristics of a mental experience are used to make an online 
judgment about the source of that experience at retrieval, based on the tendency for 
memories of different origins to have different characteristics (Johnson et al., 1993, 1988). 
For example, veridical events are typically rated higher in perceptual, emotional, temporal 
and spatial detail, while imagined events contain information about the cognitive operations 
involved in their generation (Johnson et al., 1988; Justice et al., 2013; McGinnis and 
Roberts, 1996). To be useful in determining the origin of an experience, information 
diagnostic of source must be bound at encoding and retrieved with the corresponding 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

memory trace – processes which become less efficient with age. A result is that information 
is more likely to be misattributed to an incorrect source.
Lyle and colleagues (2006) demonstrated age-related deficits in binding source and content 
information. In their study younger and older adults perceived and imagined objects, and 
later made source and location judgments for objects that were studied (e.g., magnifying 
glass) and non-studied, but perceptually similar (e.g., lollipop). Older adults were more 
likely to make errors based on the perceptual similarity of objects (i.e., mistaking a lollipop 
as previously seen), replicating previous results (Henkel et al., 1998). However, older 
participants were less likely to claim that the falsely identified object was presented in the 
same location as the similar perceived object, suggesting that perceptual and contextual 
features of the studied stimuli are less tightly bound with age.
In line with this idea, older adults engage the hippocampus and lateral PFC areas less than 
younger adults during successful source encoding, reflective of decreased relational 
processing (Dennis et al., 2008a, 2007; Dulas and Duarte, 2014; Mitchell et al., 2006). 
During source retrieval, older adults also show reduced event-related potential (ERP) 
correlates of recollection (manifesting as a weaker parietal old-new effect, Dulas & Duarte, 
2013). Moreover, providing older adults with relational memory support by encouraging 
careful consideration of the relationship between context and item at encoding eliminates 
age-related source memory deficits (Glisky et al., 2001; Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2007).
Loose binding of source information with a memory trace may explain why susceptibility to 
misinformation increases with age (Wylie et al., 2014). Misinformation-based errors arise 
when inaccurate post-event information becomes accepted as part of the original memory. 
For instance, when participants watch a video of a robbery, and are later misinformed that 
the item stolen was a ring rather than a necklace, older adults are more likely than younger 
adults to remember seeing a ring stolen in the original video (Cohen and Faulkner, 1989; 
Dodson and Krueger, 2006; Dodson et al., 2015). If contextual cues informing the source of 
either the original or misleading information are not fully bound with the appropriate 
memory representation, there is a greater chance that the misinformation will be attributed to 
the incorrect source. Indeed, it has been shown in younger adults that acceptance of 
misinformation is associated with neural activation reflecting item encoding during the 
misinformation phase, coupled with source encoding during the original event (Baym and 
Gonsalves, 2012; Okado and Stark, 2005), though it remains to be seen whether this pattern 
of results holds in an older population.
Age-related declines in attention direction and conservation may also contribute to 
inefficient binding and reduced recollection, in that certain stimuli may never enter the 
encoding process in the first place (e.g., Gazzaley et al., 2005; Healey et al., 2008). The 
dorsolateral PFC is involved in directing and maintaining attention during episodic encoding 
(Cabeza et al., 2003; Iidaka et al., 2000; MacDonald et al., 2000; Uncapher and Rugg, 
2005). Consistent with the idea that declines in attention mediated by this area contribute to 
false memory formation, when encoding items under conditions of divided attention younger 
adults perform at similar levels on subsequent memory tests as older adults under conditions 
of full attention (Attali and Dalla Barba, 2013; Castel and Craik, 2003; Jennings and Jacoby, 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1993; Skinner and Fernandes, 2009). Disruption of parietal areas may also contribute to age-
related attention deficits (Tisserand et al., 2004) and thus false memory susceptibility 
(Dennis et al., 2014; Duarte et al., 2010; Fandakova et al., 2015; Tsukiura et al., 2014).
3.1.2. Dedifferentiation and distinctiveness—Another consequence of reduced 
associative binding is that experiences from different sources are more similar in quality 
(dedifferentiated). If the enhanced phenomenological quality typically used to tag a memory 
as veridical (Johnson & Raye, 1981) is no longer available or reliable, people are less 
sensitive when discriminating between these and other experiences. Consistent with this 
proposal, older adults tend to rate authentic memories, imagined events and false memories 
as subjectively more similar than do younger adults (Gallo et al., 2011; Henkel et al., 1998; 
Karpel et al., 2001; though see McGinnis & Roberts, 1996, for evidence against this claim).
The neural signatures associated with veridical and false memories are also less 
distinguishable with age. Using EEG, Gutchess and colleagues (2007) found that during 
encoding, a fronto-central ERP distinguished subsequent hits and misses for younger but not 
older adults. Likewise, during retrieval, hits and false alarms made by older adults were 
indistinguishable by their waveforms (see also Dywan et al., 2002; Swick et al., 2006). 
Corroborating findings have been reported using fMRI; unlike younger adults, older adults 
do not display differential activation for novel items conceptually similar to or different from 
studied information (Bowman and Dennis, 2015). Older adults also exhibit less specific 
activation patterns during recollection of true and false information (Duarte et al., 2010; 
Royet et al., 2011). The overlap in neural signatures with age suggests that older adults 
process information similarly regardless of novelty or authenticity, and are indicative of age-
related difficulties in using distinctive item-specific information to make source decisions.
Experiential dedifferentiation of perceived and imagined events may contribute to the more 
prominent imagination inflation observed with age (Cohen and Faulkner, 1989; Henkel et 
al., 1998; Lyle et al., 2006; McDaniel et al., 2008; McDonough and Gallo, 2013; Thomas 
and Bulevich, 2006). Imagination inflation describes the phenomenon whereby imagining an 
event increases later belief that the event actually happened in the past (for a review, see 
Garry & Polaschek, 2000). For instance, people are more likely to claim they had actually 
performed an action if it was previously imagined, and this effect is larger for older adults 
(Cohen and Faulkner, 1989). Similarly, when asked to simulate counterfactual scenarios for 
events that have already taken place, older adults are more prone to mistaking the 
counterfactuals as the original occurrence (Gerlach et al., 2014). Inefficient binding means 
that distinctive perceptual and contextual information associated with memories, and 
information on the cognitive operations involved in simulation, are less available with age 
(McDaniel et al., 2008). Therefore, internally-derived imaginations are less distinguishable 
from externally-generated memories, and are more likely to be confused as such. In line with 
this idea, older adults remember and imagine personal life events with less episodic detail 
(Addis et al., 2010, 2008, for review of these and related studies, see Schacter et al., 2013), 
and lower recruitment of neural areas involved episodic detail retrieval (Addis et al., 2011).
A shift in focus towards the emotional aspects of an experience may compound these 
recollective deficits. Affective information takes a more prominent role during encoding and 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

retrieval with age due to changes in memory and communicative goals (Adams et al., 1997; 
Addis et al., 2008; Carstensen et al., 1999; Gaesser et al., 2011; Hashtroudi et al., 1990; 
James et al., 1998; Johnson, 2006). FMRI evidence reveals that when encoding the 
truthfulness of a statement, older adults engage areas involved in emotion processing 
(ventromedial PFC and insula) more than younger adults (Cassidy et al., 2014). Focusing on 
affective characteristics is thought to divert attention away from more source-informative 
perceptual qualities of an event (Hashtroudi et al., 1994, 1990), further contributing to the 
lowered discrimination between authentic and imagined memories (Rahhal et al., 2002; 
Suengas and Johnson, 1988). Furthermore, there is evidence that older adults are more 
susceptible to falsely recognizing and recalling positive relative to negative memories 
(Fernandes et al., 2008; Piguet et al., 2008; Werheid et al., 2010; see also Gallo et al., 2009), 
in line with an age-related positivity bias in memory (e.g., Mather & Carstensen, 2005).
If older adults are less effective at distinguishing between true and false memories, then it 
follows that age differences in false memory susceptibility can be mitigated by directing 
focus to distinctive information at encoding. Indeed, source monitoring is improved in both 
younger and older adults when information is presented in a distinctive manner (e.g., as 
pictures as opposed to words; Dodson & Schacter, 2002; Ferguson et al., 1992; Gallo et al., 
2007; Johnson et al., 1995; Pierce et al., 2008; Schacter et al., 1999; Smith et al., 2015). Age 
differences are also reduced by drawing attention to differentiating information at encoding 
or retrieval (e.g., Koutstaal et al., 1999; for a review see Koutstaal & Schacter, 2001). When 
attention is directed to source cues at study, both younger and older adults exhibit increased 
contextual binding related parahippocampal activity during encoding, and attenuated frontal 
post-retrieval monitoring effects (Dulas and Duarte, 2014, 2013). However, older adults 
require a greater disparity in the distinctiveness of presented stimuli to benefit memory, 
compared to that needed by younger adults, supportive of an inability to distinguish between 
related information with age (Smith et al., 2015). Moreover, directing focus to differentiating 
information during encoding or retrieval reduces, but does not eliminate age-differences in 
false recognition (Koutstaal et al., 1999), indicative of further cognitive mechanisms 
contributing to age increases in false memories.
3.2. Gist-based processing
Because encoding of distinctive information decreases with age, and memory traces become 
less differentiated, older adults tend to retrieve overall perceptual and conceptual similarities 
of stimuli, rather than item-specific information. While successful encoding involves 
integrating newly acquired information with existing relational memory networks, incoming 
information must also be encoded in a distinctive manner, so that the memory traces can be 
discriminated at retrieval (McClelland et al., 1995; O’Reilly and McClelland, 1994; Schacter 
et al., 1998). It has been proposed that the hippocampus becomes ‘representationally rigid’ 
with age. Subtle changes in hippocampal circuitry leads to a shift away from distinctive 
encoding of new information (pattern separation) and towards a reinstatement of already 
stored information (pattern completion; Wilson et al., 2006; Yassa, Mattfield, et al., 2011; 
Yassa, Lacy, et al., 2011). Age-related deterioration of ventrolateral PFC areas supervising 
pattern separation may also make this process less effective (Parkin et al., 1999; Schacter et 
al., 1998). This shift toward pattern completion could be considered advantageous, in that 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

we become more efficient at identifying familiar elements in new experiences, to better 
address novel future challenges (Wilson et al., 2006). However, extraction of information 
shared between events, rather than episode-specific information, increases 
overgeneralization and gist-based errors (Pidgeon and Morcom, 2014).
The Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm (Deese, 1959; Roediger and McDermott, 
1995) is commonly used to explore gist-based errors. In this paradigm, people who study 
lists of perceptually or conceptually related words (e.g., ‘sugar, candy, taste’), are likely to 
falsely remember studying an unseen yet semantically associated lure (e.g., ‘sweet’; see 
Gallo, 2006, for a review). Older adults are more susceptible to lure words than younger 
adults, suggestive of a reliance on memory for the general features of the studied stimuli, 
rather than specific item features (Balota et al., 1999; Gallo, 2006; Norman and Schacter, 
1997; Schacter et al., 1997; Tun et al., 1998). Moreover, younger adults make fewer false 
alarms for repeatedly studied word lists, indicating an enhancement of item specific 
information; in contrast, older adults show no suppression of false alarms for repeatedly 
studied lists (Kensinger and Schacter, 1999). These findings are suggestive of a reduced 
ability to use recollection of the study list to oppose the build-up of gist (Kensinger and 
Schacter, 1999; Pierce et al., 2005). Similarly, increasing the category size of a studied list, 
and thus the strength of the gist trace, negatively influences memory accuracy more for older 
compared to younger adults (Koutstaal and Schacter, 1997; Pidgeon and Morcom, 2014). 
Furthermore, consistent with findings that focusing on emotional information diverts 
attention from more source-informative cues, emotional processing can increase conceptual 
similarity across studied items for older adults (Gallo et al., 2009).
Neuroimaging findings support these behavioral studies. During false recognition of 
perceptually related lures, Paige and colleagues (in press) observed greater hippocampal 
activation for older relative to younger adults when gist was low, yet no age differences 
when gist was high. This result is thought to reflect older adults’ shift away from pattern 
separation towards pattern completion as gist increases. Older adults also recruit areas 
involved in semantic processing and gist (namely lateral temporal regions) more than 
younger adults when encoding (Dennis et al., 2007) and retrieving falsely recognized 
semantically-related lures (Dennis et al., 2008b). When recollecting perceptually related 
lures, Dennis et al. (2014) found that older adults engage inferior frontal gyrus, anterior 
cingulate cortex, parahippocampus and occipitoparietal cortex to a lesser degree than 
younger adults, indicating a reduced reliance on reconstructive processes. Furthermore, an 
individual differences analysis in older adults demonstrated that higher false recollection 
predicted increased activity in temporal areas supporting semantic gist. These results 
indicate that false recollection in younger adults is attributable to erroneous reconstruction of 
studied event content, yet in older adults may be the result of gist trace retrieval.
3.3. Deficits in strategic retrieval
In addition to encoding deficits, impaired strategic retrieval also plays a role in age-related 
associative deficits (Cohn et al., 2008). Therefore, even when source information is 
successfully encoded, older adults may not use this information efficiently during retrieval to 
make monitoring decisions. Lateral PFC regions are pivotal to accurate retrieval monitoring, 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

both in determining whether individual memory features pertain to the episode of interest, as 
well as whether the event as a whole is internally-derived or externally-experienced 
(Blumenfeld et al., 2011; Dobbins et al., 2002; Henson et al., 1999; Schacter et al., 1998; 
Slotnick et al., 2003). While lateral regions are most consistently associated with source 
monitoring (see Mitchell & Johnson, 2009 for a review), damage to other PFC regions (e.g., 
ventromedial, orbitofrontal) also results in source memory impairments and elevated false 
recognition (Melo et al., 1999; Parkin et al., 1996; Rapcsak et al., 1999; Schacter et al., 
1996; Simons et al., 2002). It is likely that age-related decline in lateral and other PFC 
regions contributes to retrieval source monitoring deficits.
To test whether retrieval monitoring difficulties contribute to age-related increases in false 
memories beyond encoding deficits, McDonough and Gallo (2013) had younger and older 
adults recall autobiographical memories and simulate personal future events. For half the 
events, elaboration instructions were used to increase the associated memory features. 
Participants were later asked to discriminate between the memories and future events. 
Despite successfully encoding and retrieving more features in the elaboration condition, 
older adults were not able to use these features to reduce source confusions to the level of 
younger adults. These results implicate age-related impairments in accurate retrieval 
monitoring processes above and beyond deficits in encoding or recollection. Further 
evidence shows that older adults use warnings given at retrieval about misleading 
information to reduce memory errors (Dodson et al., 2015; see also Coane et al., 2015; 
though see McCabe & Smith, 2002). Moreover, when older adults are provided with 
supportive instructions to focus on perceptual and contextual cues at retrieval, age-
differences in imagination inflation are diminished (Henkel, 2008; Thomas and Bulevich, 
2006). To be able to use these source informative cues they must be encoded in the first 
place, suggesting that older adults have difficulty spontaneously accessing or effectively 
using these cues during recall (Koutstaal, 2003).
Reduced efficiency of retrieval monitoring processes may necessitate a reliance on less 
effortful monitoring strategies. In a series of three DRM-based experiments, Thomas and 
McDaniel (2013) link an age-reduction in the effective use of source information at retrieval 
to declines in executive function. In their study, relational processing was manipulated 
during encoding of distinctive and non-distinctive items. Both younger and older adults were 
able to use distinctive information alone to reduce false alarms. However, older adults with 
lower executive functioning were unable to use distinctive information to overcome false 
memories based on relational memory. It appears that when there are competing source cues, 
individuals with impoverished frontal functioning cannot effectively use strategic 
information to make recognition decisions, and so rely on less effortful relational 
information. Consistent with this theory, age-deficits in the use of source cues are 
particularly pronounced when multiple source cues are available (Ferguson et al., 1992; 
Gallo et al., 2006; Johnson et al., 1995).
3.4. Overreliance on familiarity
A repercussion of age-related reductions in memory encoding and retrieval is an increased 
reliance on automatic processes. The dual processing account theorizes two separable 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

processes underlying recognition memory: familiarity and recollection (Hintzman & Curran, 
1994; Jacoby, 1991; Yonelinas, 2002). Whereas recollection is an effortful retrieval of 
specific memory details, familiarity is a rapid process lacking conscious retrieval of context. 
In contrast to neural declines in hippocampally-mediated recollection, the neural substrates 
underlying familiarity (predominantly the parahippocampal and perirhinal cortices) are 
relatively spared with age (Daselaar et al., 2006; Dennis et al., 2008b; Insausti et al., 1998; 
Yonelinas et al., 2007). Thus, in the face of reductions in recollective memory, it is thought 
that older adults rely more on familiarity when making recognition judgments (Anderson et 
al., 2008; Craik & McDowd, 1987; Davidson & Glisky, 2002; Giovanello et al., 2010; 
Jennings & Jacoby, 1997; Parkin & Walter, 1992; Prull et al., 2006). Use of familiarity is a 
generally adaptive compensatory memory strategy; however, familiarity-based information 
without accompanying contextual details can be misleading, and therefore contributes to the 
enhanced rate of memory errors with age.
Consistent with an age-related reduction in recollection and increase in the use of familiarity, 
recall-to-reject mechanisms of source monitoring – where recollection of the original 
memory allows rejection of lure information – become less efficient with age (e.g., Gallo et 
al., 2006). Enhancing lure familiarity increases rates of false alarms in older but not younger 
adults (Edmonds et al., 2012; Fandakova et al., 2013a, 2013b; Jacoby, 1999; Jones & Jacoby, 
2005; note, however, that age-differences are not always found for familiarity or fluency-
based memory illusions; see Thapar & Westerman, 2009). When younger adults are placed 
under time pressure to reduce their ability to use recollective strategies, they respond 
similarly to older adults (Jones and Jacoby, 2005; Light et al., 2006). Older adults with poor 
associative memory or executive functioning are particularly reliant on familiarity when 
making recognition decisions (Fandakova et al., 2013a; Parkin and Walter, 1992), consistent 
with a reduced availability of recollective information due to MTL and PFC decline.
Familiarity in the absence of recollection is thought to underlie older adults’ increased 
vulnerability to making memory conjunction errors. Conjunction errors occur when a lure 
comprised of features from studied stimuli is falsely recognized as being previously 
encountered (e.g., studied words = snowball, sandman; conjunction lure = snowman). Older 
adults are more susceptible to these errors across a range of stimuli types (word pairs, Castel 
& Craik, 2003; faces and names, Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2009; people and actions, Old & 
Naveh-Benjamin, 2008). An age-increase in conjunction errors is observed even when item 
memory is equivalent between age groups, implicating a specific relational deficit (Kersten 
and Earles, 2010). According to the associative deficit hypothesis, older adults are less able 
to remember relations between memory features, but memory for the individual features is 
preserved (see Naveh-Benjamin et al., 2003; Naveh-Benjamin, 2000). Therefore recognition 
decisions are based on familiarity with the component parts of the stimuli, which can be 
erroneously elicited by novel combinations of old features. Supporting this theory, older 
adults do not use strengthened associations between word pairs to the same degree as 
younger adults to avoid conjunction errors (Buchler et al., 2011; Jones and Jacoby, 2005). 
Older adults are also more likely to make conjunction errors between actors and actions 
regardless of the original association between features (i.e., whether they are from the same 
or different events, Kersten et al., 2013).
Devitt and Schacter
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Age-related increases in conjunction errors are associated with the functional and structural 
integrity of MTL regions. Specifically, structural decline in the dentate gyrus and CA3–4 
subfield of the hippocampus is correlated with greater false alarms to conjunction lures 
(Shing et al., 2011). Giovanello and colleagues (2010) demonstrated that older adults recruit 
the right hippocampus less than younger adults during accurate retrieval of conjunction 
stimuli, reflective of recollective declines. Additionally, only older adults activate right 
parahippocampal activity more during false retrieval of conjunction lures compared with 
true, indicative of an overreliance on familiarity. In line with these findings, Fandakova et al. 
(2014) found that on an individual level, stronger hippocampal activation in response to 
associative novelty was related to fewer memory errors for both younger and older adults. 
However, overall the older group exhibited less hippocampal activation in response to 
conjunction lures, perhaps due to a lowered ability to detect novel associations of familiar 
stimuli.
Interestingly, study context influences the type of false memories produced in a similar 
manner for younger and older adults. Matzen and Benjamin (2013) combined the DRM and 
conjunction error paradigms, and asked participants to learn compound words (e.g. 
‘blackmail’ and ‘jailbird’) in either a list or sentence context. Both younger and older adults 
were later more susceptible to semantic lures (e.g., ‘criminal’) rather than conjunction lures 
(e.g., ‘blackbird’) after studying the words in a sentence, whereas the opposite pattern was 
seen when the words were studied in a list. Presumably, in a sentence context participants 
encode the general gist of the word list, increasing vulnerability to conceptually related 
lures, but in a list context they rely on surface-level information, meaning conjunction errors 
can arise if associative information between word fragments is lost.
3.5. Disinhibition and hyper-binding
Relying on familiarity in the absence of recollection cannot entirely account for the increase 
in conjunction errors with age. Both younger adults and older adults claim to remember 
conjunction errors with a sense of recollection (Burt et al., 2004; Odegard and Lampinen, 
2004; Pitarque et al., 2015; Reinitz et al., 1994, 1992), and these errors also occur in free 
recall (Reinitz and Hannigan, 2001). Moreover, recollection does not always allow rejection 
of conjunction lures (Jones and Bartlett, 2009). Additionally, across a number of studies it 
has been shown that effect sizes for age-related differences in false alarms are greater for 
‘remember’ (characteristic of recollection, Tulving, 1985) than ‘know’ judgments (reflecting 
familiarity; McCabe et al., 2009). To account for this pattern of false alarms with age, 
Dodson, and colleagues (Dodson et al., 2007a, 2007b) proposed the misrecollection account, 
which argues that familiarity errors are the result of underbinding of memory elements, 
whereas recollection-based errors the result of excessive binding.
When tested on stimuli relevant to the memory task, older adults typically display 
associative deficits (Naveh-Benjamin, 2000). However, when tested on irrelevant 
information, older adults exhibit the opposite effect: forming too many associations, rather 
than too little (Campbell et al., 2012, 2010). This hyper-binding phenomenon is linked with 
age-related impairments in the inhibition of distracting information (e.g., Gazzaley et al., 
2005; Hasher et al., 1999), a process dependent on various PFC subregions, including lateral 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

and anterior cingulate cortices (Chao and Knight, 1995; Dillon and Pizzagalli, 2007; 
Elderkin-Thompson et al., 2008). Hyper-binding is more likely to occur when stimuli are 
presented close together in time, suggesting that older adults have difficulty suppressing 
recently learned but currently irrelevant information (Campbell et al., 2014, 2012, 2010). 
Conflicting information from these irrelevant associations disrupts the ability to form new 
associations between relevant stimuli, resulting in the associative deficits often observed 
with age. Hyper-binding is thought to have some benefits, in that older adults are able to link 
more distant ideas together, and so are better able to see the ‘big picture’ (Campbell et al., 
2014, 2012). However, hyper-binding may also contribute to deficits in pattern separation, 
allowing memory features to be erroneously incorporated across overlapping memory traces, 
thereby forming conjunction errors.
Campbell et al. (2014) explored the influence of hyper-binding on conjunction error 
formation by having younger and older adults learn word pairs. Memory for these pairs was 
tested using intact and conjunction stimuli; importantly, the conjunction stimuli were derived 
either from pairs occurring temporally close together or far apart on the study list. Older 
adults were particularly susceptible to making conjunction errors for pairs presented close 
together, whereas younger adults made about the same number of false alarms for near- and 
far-conjunctions. These results are consistent with the idea that older adults form erroneous 
associations between stimuli, especially if such stimuli occur within a close timeframe (see 
also Dodson et al., 2007a; Kroll et al., 1996; Shing et al., 2009). This age-increase in 
conjunction errors occurred for stimuli presented up to seven items apart; though because 
continuous spacing was not used, it remains to be determined how wide the ‘hyper-binding 
lens’ extends for older adults.
Age-related impairments in inhibitory ability can also contribute to familiarity-based 
distortions. Spreading activation between related memory constructs is preserved with age 
(Gallo & Roediger, 2003; Lee et al., 2012), yet older adults are less able to inhibit the sense 
of familiarity garnered by activated but irrelevant memory traces (Dehon and Brédart, 2004; 
Sommers and Huff, 2003). In line with this idea, poor executive functioning is associated 
with an increased susceptibility to familiarity for words as whole, as well as with the 
individual components (Fandakova et al., 2013a, 2013b). Neuroimaging studies also support 
this view; using EEG, Dywan et al. (2002) found greater amplitude ERP waveforms in 
frontal areas for older compared to younger adults when false alarming to familiar words. 
This increased neural response is thought to reflect reduced suppression of the cortical 
response to the familiar non-target items. Yet in contrast to these findings, fMRI data show 
that older adults recruit the anterior PFC less than younger adults as lure word familiarity 
increases, despite false alarming to these lures more, suggestive of reduced efficiency of 
frontal monitoring processes (Fandakova et al., 2014). Differences in the timing and regional 
specificity of neural responses measured by EEG and fMRI likely reveal various aspects of 
the response to familiar lures.
Individual differences in inhibition ability also influences the effective use of retrieval 
monitoring strategies. Colombel et al. (2016) presented older adults with either typical DRM 
instructions to retrieve only studied items, or with inclusion instructions to recall all words 
thought of during study or recall regardless of accuracy. The inclusion condition removes the 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

requirement of monitoring at retrieval, thus if faulty monitoring is to blame for errors in the 
typical DRM, participants should make a similar number of errors regardless of the 
instructions received. They found that inhibition ability was predictive of false alarms. 
Moreover, older adults with higher inhibition scores made more errors if they received the 
inclusion instructions, whereas those with lower inhibition scores had similar error rates 
following both typical and inclusion instructions, implicating ineffective use of monitoring 
processes with declining inhibition. However, as the authors note, this link is relatively 
fragile and further research is needed to disentangle the contribution of inhibition processes 
to memory distortions in both older and younger adults.
3.6. Summary
To summarize thus far, age-related increases in false memories result from interacting 
impairments in memory encoding, retrieval and monitoring mechanisms reliant on a number 
of regions within the MTL and PFC. Reduced associative binding means that memory traces 
are less distinctive, allowing for source misattributions and gist-based errors to occur. 
Additional declines in strategic monitoring processes are evident with age; in effect, older 
adults are reliant on less cognitively demanding, but also less accurate, monitoring 
mechanisms, such as making source decisions on the basis of familiarity. Older adults are 
also more likely to form spurious associations between incoming stimuli, and be distracted 
by cues that are not informative of source. Some of these cognitive processes – such as a 
reliance on familiarity in the absence of recollection, a shift towards pattern completion, and 
a tendency towards hyper-binding – could be considered adaptive changes with age, or at 
least strategies to compensate for limited memory resources. It has been argued that false 
memories in younger adults are the by-product of otherwise advantageous memory 
mechanisms (Schacter et al., 2011). In the same way, the cost of adopting more cognitively 
efficient memory processes with age may be increased opportunities for false memories to 
form.
4. Implications
In many circumstances memory authenticity is important; for instance, remembering 
whether one took their medication, turned the stove off, or locked the door before leaving, or 
only thought about doing so. A functional episodic memory system is vital for preserving a 
high quality of life with age, particularly with regards to maintaining independent living 
(Farias et al., 2009). Yet little is known about the impact of false memories on daily life in 
healthy older adults. It is evident that understanding the cognitive underpinnings of age-
related increases in false memory susceptibility can inform strategies to improve memory 
accuracy in older adults. For instance, providing warnings of potential misinformation in 
memory accounts can reduce false alarms in older adults (Carmichael and Gutchess, 2015; 
Coane et al., 2015; Dodson et al., 2015; Watson et al., 2004). Moreover, directing attention 
towards differentiating information at encoding or retrieval (Dodson and Schacter, 2002; 
Koutstaal et al., 1999; Schacter et al., 1999), or encouraging careful consideration of source 
during recall (Henkel, 2008), also reduces age differences in false memories. Training 
specific monitoring strategies can also benefit memory accuracy; Da Silva and Sunderland 
(2010) found that training older adults to detect repeated stimuli presentations reduces 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

familiarity-based false memories, however this effect had limited generalizability to other 
memory tests. Development of a monitoring strategy that is effective across contexts would 
be a beneficial application of aging false memory research.
The increased susceptibility to false memories with age also has relevance for eyewitness 
testimony, which often serves as the primary form of evidence in legal cases (Buckhout, 
1975; Howe and Knott, 2015; Loftus, 2003; Schacter and Loftus, 2013). Older adults are 
more likely than younger adults to report incorrect information after seeing a crime take 
place (Aizpurua et al., 2011, 2009; Cohen and Faulkner, 1989; Dodson and Krueger, 2006; 
Kersten et al., 2013) or identify the incorrect perpetrator in a suspect lineup (Memon et al., 
2003). Moreover, older adults are poorly calibrated in determining the accuracy of their 
memories, in that they are more confident that these memory distortions represent reality 
(Cohen and Faulkner, 1989; Dehon and Brédart, 2004; Dodson and Krueger, 2006; Jacoby 
and Rhodes, 2006; Jacoby et al., 2010; Shing et al., 2009). Indeed, age differences in 
memory errors are greatest for decisions made with high confidence (Dodson et al., 2015; 
Fandakova et al., 2013b; Gallo et al., 2009; Tsukiura et al., 2014). Thus, it is important to 
understand the mechanisms underlying increased false memory with age, as even eyewitness 
testimony from older adults given with high confidence may not be a reliable indicator of 
genuine accuracy.
5. Further questions and considerations
A number of factors moderate the effect of age on false memory susceptibility, and should 
be taken into consideration both when exploring potential underlying cognitive and neural 
mechanisms, and when attempting to preserve memory accuracy.
First, “false memory” is a broad term that covers a range of errors. As discussed earlier, 
different types of false memories typically arise via separable mechanisms; for example, 
source misattribution can occur due to inefficient binding, whereas gist errors result from 
insufficient pattern separation. In some cases the same type of error may arise via multiple 
routes: for instance, conjunction errors can result from underbinding and a subsequent 
reliance on familiarity (Jones and Bartlett, 2009; Jones and Jacoby, 2001; Rubin et al., 
1999), as well as excessive binding of memory features (Campbell et al., 2014; Dodson et 
al., 2007b; Kroll et al., 1996; Reinitz and Hannigan, 2001). Following from these 
observations, we must consider that individual heterogeneity in cognitive aging (e.g., 
Hultsch, Strauss, Hunter, & MacDonald, 2008) could be linked with variation in 
susceptibility to specific types of false memories. For younger adults, vulnerability to one 
type of memory error does not necessarily predict likelihood of falling prey to other types of 
errors (Calvillo & Parong, 2016; Ost et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2013; though see Gallo, 2010). 
The question remains open whether age-related increases in false memory susceptibility are 
selective or generalizable across several types of memory errors at an individual level, and 
whether any differences can be linked to selective deficits in certain cognitive processes.
Related to this idea, while we have made progress in identifying neural correlates of false 
memories, we cannot yet draw firm conclusions regarding the role of specific MTL and PFC 
subregions in specific aspects of the age-related increase in false memories. In younger 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

adults, a recent Activation Likelihood Estimation (ALE) meta-analysis of false memory 
neuroimaging studies sheds some light on PFC subregions consistently involved in memory 
distortions, identifying the medial superior PFC, ventromedial PFC and ventral anterior 
cingulate cortex as a critical components of the false memory network (Kurkela and Dennis, 
2016). However, whether these regions are also implicated in the age-related false memory 
increase remains to be determined. Shing and colleagues (2011) provide another promising 
lead on this front with regard to the MTL, identifying a link between structural decline in the 
dentate/CA3–4 subfield of the hippocampus and errors in an associative memory test in 
older adults. These findings dovetail nicely with those implicating changes in the 
dentate/CA3 subregion in the age-associated shift towards pattern completion (Wilson et al., 
2006; Yassa et al., 2011a, 2011b). Future research should continue to address the 
subregional specificity of the processes contributing to false memories with age.
The recruitment of specific neural regions may be influenced by false memory strength or 
mode of memory retrieval. For instance, during false recognition of lure stimuli, older adults 
engage the parahippocampal gyrus more so than younger adults, potentially reflecting a 
reliance on familiarity in the absence of recollection (Giovanello et al., 2010). Yet when 
participants claim to recollect previously encountering a lure, by giving such stimuli a 
“remember” as opposed to a “know” response during recognition (Tulving, 1985), older 
adults show reduced parahippocampal recruitment compared to younger adults, perhaps due 
to a reduction in reconstructive processes with age (Dennis et al., 2014). These studies 
examined different types of false memories (conjunction errors and perceptually related 
distortions, respectively) which could account for the disparity in these findings. However, 
Paige et al. (in press) examined false recognition for perceptually related lures, and still 
report different activation patterns than Dennis et al. (see Section 3.2 above). It is therefore 
possible that the mode of false retrieval modulates MTL activity.
The nature of the testing environment can also moderate the age-related influence on false 
memory susceptibility. When older adults are tested at an optimal time of day (typically in 
the morning) age differences in memory accuracy are diminished (Hasher et al., 1999; 
Intons-Peterson et al., 1999). It has also recently been shown that invoking aging and 
memory stereotype threats before testing alters false memory rates. Invoking a stereotype 
threat explicitly, by providing participants with summaries of research supporting an age-
related memory decline, reduces false recall and recognition, potentially because older 
adults adopt a more conservative response criterion (Barber and Mather, 2013; Wong and 
Gallo, 2015). Interestingly, if the threat is invoked implicitly, by subliminally presenting 
negative age-related words (e.g., ‘feeble’), older adults are more likely to make false alarms, 
possibly because controlled monitoring processes are disrupted by anxiety over the testing 
situation (Krendl et al., 2015). The circumstances under which an elderly eyewitness is 
questioned is thus an important consideration to preserve accuracy of a memory.
Encoding and retrieval processes likely make different relative contributions to the increased 
false memories observed with aging. However, due to the inextricable links between 
encoding and retrieval, it is methodologically difficult to disentangle the independent 
influence of these two processes to false memory formation. For example, feature binding 
and pattern separation mechanisms at encoding influence the subsequent success of pattern 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

completion procedures during retrieval. Often a false memory may arise at multiple points 
along the encoding and retrieval pipeline. For instance, misinformation errors may occur if 
the original information is not properly encoded, if source for the misleading information is 
not encoded, or if the misleading information is later retrieved along with the original 
memory trace. As such, delineating the independent contributions of encoding and retrieval 
to the generation of memory errors, particularly with regards to the aging process, is an 
ongoing endeavor (e.g., Abe et al., 2013; Huff et al., 2015; Kurkela & Dennis, 2016).
Finally, as noted briefly earlier, although the malleability of memory renders us susceptible 
to a range of memory distortions that become increasingly common with age, this property 
of episodic memory may also be adaptive (cf., Howe, 2011; Newman & Lindsay, 2009; 
Schacter et al., 2011; Schacter, 2001), in that it reflects the operation of a flexible system in 
which individual memory features can be rearranged to simulate future happenings 
(Schacter and Addis, 2007), imagine alternative past outcomes (De Brigard et al., 2013; 
Gerlach et al., 2014), and creatively solve problems (Madore and Schacter, 2014; Madore et 
al., 2015; Sheldon et al., 2011). Recent studies of older adults have begun to examine 
adaptive uses of episodic memory in imagination (e.g., Addis et al., 2008), problem solving 
(Madore and Schacter, 2014; Sheldon et al., 2011), and creativity (Madore et al., 2016), but 
direct links between these adaptive processes and false memory in aging need to be 
explored.
In line with this general theme, the ability to update memory with newly acquired 
information is arguably an adaptive characteristic of the reconstructive memory system (Lee, 
2009; Schacter et al., 2011). A consequence of the age-related reliance on reinstatement of 
previously encoded information is reduced memory updating (Attali and Dalla Barba, 2013). 
Somewhat paradoxically, a reduced capacity to update memory with new information may 
prevent the formation of false memories. While susceptibility to misinformation generally 
increases with age (Wylie et al., 2014), there are exceptions to this pattern. Umanath and 
Marsh (2012) demonstrated that, after reading stories containing factual inaccuracies, older 
adults reproduced fewer of these errors during retrieval, despite identifying them at an 
identical rate as younger adults during encoding (see also Umanath et al., 2014). Indeed, 
older adults exhibit a reduction in both the benefits and costs of memory reactivation (St. 
Jacques et al., 2015). These studies highlight the possibility that reliance on prior knowledge 
in the face of reduced memory updating can actually lower assimilation of misinformation. 
Of course, the flip side of reduced memory updating is that if an original memory is 
incorrect in some way, reliance on prior knowledge means that the inaccurate memory 
persists (Vannucci et al., 2012). It is also interesting that when information about the original 
event is sparse, older adults are less vulnerable to misinformation than younger adults, 
presumably due to lower memory for the misleading information (Marche et al., 2002). An 
intriguing prospect raised by these findings is that older adults with superior memory 
performance may in fact be more vulnerable to errors via misinformation than those with 
poorer memory.
Devitt and Schacter
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

6. Conclusion
In general, susceptibility to false memories increases with advancing age. In this review we 
highlight the complexity and heterogeneity of cognitive aging, demonstrating that the age 
increase in false memories can be attributed to a number of changes occurring at both 
encoding and retrieval. Broadly, the enhanced likelihood of memory errors can be linked to 
declines in a number of regions within MTL and PFC, leading to deficits in associative 
binding and strategic monitoring. Those impairments themselves result in a cascade of 
cognitive changes, including reduced recollective ability, a subsequent reliance on 
misleading monitoring mechanisms such as familiarity, incomplete pattern separation 
resulting in an overreliance on gist information, as well as a reduced ability to inhibit 
erroneous binding and irrelevant information. Elucidating the cognitive and neural 
underpinnings of enhanced false memories in older adults informs not only our 
understanding of typical memory changes with age, but also the functioning of the 
constructive memory system across the lifespan, and the way in which errors can take hold 
within this system.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a National Institute on Aging grant R01 AG08441 awarded to DLS.
References
Abe N, Fujii T, Suzuki M, Ueno A, Shigemune Y, Mugikura S, Takahashi S, Mori E. Encoding- and 
retrieval-related brain activity underlying false recognition. Neurosci. Res. 2013; 76:240–250. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neures.2013.05.006. [PubMed: 23726799] 
Adams C, Smith MC, Nyquist L, Perlmutter M. Adult age-group differences in recall for the literal and 
interpretive meanings of narrative text. Journals Gerontol. Ser. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 1997; 52B:
187–195.
Addis DR, Giovanello KS, Vu M, Schacter DL. Age-related changes in prefrontal and hippocampal 
contributions to relational encoding. Neuroimage. 2014; 84:19–26. [PubMed: 23994453] 
Addis DR, Musicaro R, Pan L, Schacter DL. Episodic simulation of past and future events in older 
adults: Evidence from an experimental recombination task. Psychol. Aging. 2010; 25:369–376. 
[PubMed: 20545421] 
Addis DR, Roberts RP, Schacter DL. Age-related neural changes in autobiographical remembering and 
imagining. Neuropsychologia. 2011; 49:3656–3669. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2011.09.021. [PubMed: 21945808] 
Addis DR, Wong AT, Schacter DL. Age-related changes in the episodic simulation of future events. 
Psychol. Sci. 2008; 19:33–41. [PubMed: 18181789] 
Aizpurua A, Garcia-Bajos E, Migueles M. False recognition and source attribution for actions of an 
emotional event in older and younger adults. Exp. Aging Res. 2011; 37:310–329. [PubMed: 
21534031] 
Aizpurua A, Garcia-Bojos E, Migueles M. Memory for actions of an event: Older and younger adults 
compared. J. Gen. Psychol. 2009; 136:428–441. [PubMed: 19943614] 
Anderson ND, Ebert PL, Jennings JM, Grady CL, Cabeza R, Graham SJ. Recollection- and 
familiarity-based memory in healthy aging and amnestic mild cognitive impairment. 
Neuropsychology. 2008; 22:177–187. [PubMed: 18331160] 
Andrews-Hanna JR, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Lustig C, Head D, Raichle ME, Buckner RL. Disruption 
of large-scale brain systems in advanced aging. Neuron. 2007; 56:924–935. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuron.2007.10.038. [PubMed: 18054866] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Attali E, Dalla Barba G. Confabulation in healthy aging is related to poor encoding and retrieval of 
over-learned information. Aging, Neuropsychol. Cogn. 2013; 20:339–355.
Balota DA, Cortese MJ, Duchek JM, Adams D, Roediger HL, McDermott KB, Yerys BE. Veridical 
and false memories in healthy older adults and in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. Cogn. 
Neuropsychol. 1999; 16:361–384.
Balota, DA.; Dolan, PO.; Duchek, JM. Memory changes in healthy older adults. In: Tulving, E., editor. 
The Oxford Handbook of Memory. New York, NY, US: Oxford University Press; 2000. p. 
395-409.
Barber SJ, Mather M. Stereotype threat can reduce older adults’ memory errors. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 
2013; 66:1888–1895.
Baym CL, Gonsalves BD. Comparison of neural activity that leads to true memories, false memories, 
and forgetting: An fMRI study of the misinformation effect. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 2012; 
10:339–348.
Becker N, Laukka EJ, Kalpouzos G, Naveh-Benjamin M, Bäckman L, Brehmer Y. Structural brain 
correlates of associative memory in older adults. Neuroimage. 2015; 118:146–153. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.002. [PubMed: 26054875] 
Bender AR, Naveh-Benjamin M, Raz N. Associative deficit in recognition memory in a lifespan 
sample of healthy adults. Psychol. Aging. 2010; 25:940–948. [PubMed: 20822256] 
Blumenfeld RS, Parks CM, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C. Putting the pieces together: The role of 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in relational memory encoding. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 2011; 23:257–
265. [PubMed: 20146616] 
Bowman CR, Dennis NA. Age differences in the neural correlates of novelty processing: The effects of 
item-relatedness. Brain Res. 2015; 1612:2–15. [PubMed: 25149192] 
Buchler NG, Faunce P, Light LL, Gottfredson N, Reder LM. Effects of repetition on associative 
recognition in young and older adults: Item and associative strengthening. Psychol. Aging. 2011; 
26:111–126. [PubMed: 20973609] 
Buckhout R. Eyewitness testimony. Jurimetrics J. 1975; 15:171–187.
Buckner RL. Memory and executive function in aging and AD: Multiple factors that cause decline and 
reserve factors that compensate. Neuron. 2004; 44:195–208. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuron.2004.09.006. [PubMed: 15450170] 
Buckner, RL.; Head, D.; Lustig, C. Brain changes in aging: A lifespan perspective. In: Bialystok, E.; 
Craik, FIM., editors. Lifespan Cognition: Mechanisms of Change. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 2006. p. 27-42.
Burt CDB, Kemp S, Conway MA. Memory for true and false autobiographical event descriptions. 
Memory. 2004; 12:545–552. [PubMed: 15615313] 
Butler KM, McDaniel MA, Dornburg CC, Price AL, Roediger HL. Age differences in veridical and 
false recall are not inevitable: The role of frontal lobe function. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 2004; 11:921–
925. [PubMed: 15732704] 
Cabeza, R. Prefrontal and medial temporal lobe contributions to relational memory in young and older 
adults. In: Zimmer, H.; Mecklinger, A.; Lindenberger, U., editors. Binding in Human Memory: A 
Neurocognitive Approach. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2006. p. 595-626.
Cabeza R. Hemispheric asymmetry reduction in older adults: The HAROLD model. Psychol. Aging. 
2002; 17:85–100. [PubMed: 11931290] 
Cabeza R, Anderson ND, Locantore JK, McIntosh AR. Aging gracefully: Compensatory brain activity 
in high-performing older adults. Neuroimage. 2002; 17:1394–1402. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
nimg.2002.1280. [PubMed: 12414279] 
Cabeza R, Dolcos F, Prince S, Rice HJ, Weissman DH, Nyberg L. Attention-related activity during 
episodic memory retrieval: a cross-function fMRI study. Neuropsychologia. 2003; 41:390–399. 
[PubMed: 12457763] 
Calvillo DP, Parong JA. The misinformation effect is unrelated to the DRM effect with and without a 
DRM warning. Memory. 2016; 24:324–333. [PubMed: 25664935] 
Campbell KL, Hasher L, Thomas RC. Hyper-binding a unique age effect. Psychol. Sci. 2010; 21:399–
405. [PubMed: 20424077] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Campbell KL, Trelle A, Hasher L. Hyper-binding across time: Age differences in the effect of 
temporal proximity on paired-associate learning. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 2014; 
40:300–305. [PubMed: 23751006] 
Campbell KL, Zimerman S, Healey MK, Lee MMS, Hasher L. Age differences in visual statistical 
learning. Psychol. Aging. 2012; 27:650–656. [PubMed: 22251380] 
Carmichael AM, Gutchess AH. Using warnings to reduce categorical false memories in younger and 
older adults. Memory. 2015
Carstensen LL, Isaacowitz DM, Charles ST. Taking time seriously: A theory of socioemotional 
selectivity. Am. Psychol. 1999; 54:165–181. [PubMed: 10199217] 
Cassidy BS, Hedden T, Yoon C, Gutchess AH. Age differences in medial prefrontal activity for 
subsequent memory of truth value. Front. Psychol. 2014; 5
Castel AD, Craik FIM. The effects of aging and divided attention on memory for item and associative 
information. Psychol. Aging. 2003; 18:873–885. [PubMed: 14692872] 
Chalfonte B, Johnson MK. Feature memory and binding in young and older adults. Mem. Cognit. 
1996; 24:403–416.
Chan JCK, McDermott KB. The effects of frontal lobe functioning and age on veridical and false 
recall. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 2007; 14:606–611. [PubMed: 17972721] 
Chao LL, Knight RT. Human prefrontal lesions increase distractibility to irrelevant sensory inputs. 
Neuroreport. 1995; 6:1605–1610. [PubMed: 8527724] 
Coane JH, Huff MJ, Hutchison KA. The ironic effect of guessing: increased false memory for 
mediated lists in younger and older adults. Aging, Neuropsychol. Cogn. 2015; 23:282–303.
Cohen G, Faulkner D. Age differences in source forgetting: effects on reality monitoring and on 
eyewitness testimony. Psychol. Aging. 1989; 4:10. [PubMed: 2803602] 
Cohn M, Emrich SM, Moscovitch M. Age-related deficits in associative memory: The influence of 
impaired strategic retrieval. Psychol. Aging. 2008; 23:93–103. [PubMed: 18361659] 
Colombel F, Tessoulin M, Gilet A-L, Corson YAI. False memories and normal aging: Links between 
inhibitory capacities and monitoring processes. Psychol. Aging. 2016; 31:239–248. [PubMed: 
27111523] 
Craik FIM, McDowd JM. Age differences in recall and recognition. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. 
Cogn. 1987; 13:474–479.
Craik FIM, Morris LW, Morris RG, Loewen ER. Relations between source amnesia and frontal lobe 
functioning in older adults. Psychol. Aging. 1990; 5:148–151. [PubMed: 2317296] 
Da Silva L, Sunderland A. Effects of immediate feedback and errorless learning on recognition 
memory processing in young and older adults. Neuropsychol. Rehabil. 2010; 20:42–58. [PubMed: 
19626558] 
Daselaar SM, Fleck MS, Dobbins IG, Madden DJ, Cabeza R. Effects of healthy aging on hippocampal 
and rhinal memory functions: an event-related fMRI study. Cereb. Cortex. 2006; 16:1771–1782. 
[PubMed: 16421332] 
Davachi L, Mitchell JP, Wagner AD. Multiple routes to memory: Distinct medial temporal lobe 
processes build item and source memories. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2003; 100:2157–2162. [PubMed: 
12578977] 
Davidson PSR, Glisky EL. Neuropsychological correlates of recollection and familiarity in normal 
aging. Cogn. Affect. Behav. Neurosci. 2002; 2:174–186. [PubMed: 12455684] 
De Brigard F, Addis DR, Ford JH, Schacter DL, Giovanello KS. Remembering what could have 
happened: Neural correlates of episodic counterfactual thinking. Neuropsychologia. 2013; 
51:2401–2414. [PubMed: 23376052] 
Deese J. On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. J. Exp. 
Psychol. 1959; 58:17. [PubMed: 13664879] 
Dehon H, Brédart S. False memories: Young and older adults think of semantic associates at the same 
rate, but young adults are more successful at source monitoring. Psychol. Aging. 2004; 19:191–
197. [PubMed: 15065942] 
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, Peterson KM. Age-related differences in the neural correlates mediating 
false recollection. Neurobiol. Aging. 2014; 35:395–407. [PubMed: 24094578] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Dennis NA, Hayes SM, Prince S, Madden DJ, Huettel SA, Cabeza R. Effects of aging on the neural 
correlates of successful item and source memory encoding. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 
2008a; 34:791–808. [PubMed: 18605869] 
Dennis NA, Kim H, Cabeza R. Age-related differences in brain activity during true and false memory 
retrieval. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 2008b; 20:1390–1402. [PubMed: 18303982] 
Dennis NA, Kim H, Cabeza R. Effects of aging on true and false memory formation: An fMRI study. 
Neuropsychologia. 2007; 45:3157–3166. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.
2007.07.003. [PubMed: 17716696] 
Dillon DG, Pizzagalli DA. Inhibition of Action, Thought, and Emotion: A Selective Neurobiological 
Review. Appl. Prev. Psychol. 2007; 12:99–114. [PubMed: 19050749] 
Dobbins IG, Foley HJ, Schacter DL, Wagner AD. Executive control during episodic retrieval: Multiple 
prefrontal processes subserve source memory. Neuron. 2002; 35:989–996. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00858-9. [PubMed: 12372291] 
Dodson CS, Bawa S, Krueger LE. Aging, metamemory, and high-confidence errors: A misrecollection 
account. Psychol. Aging. 2007a; 22:122–133. [PubMed: 17385989] 
Dodson CS, Bawa S, Slotnick SD. Aging, source memory, and misrecollections. J. Exp. Psychol. 
Learn. Mem. Cogn. 2007b
Dodson CS, Krueger LE. I misremember it well: Why older adults are unreliable eyewitnesses. 
Psychon. Bull. Rev., Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society. 2006; 13:770–775.
Dodson CS, Powers E, Lytell M. Aging, confidence, and misinformation: Recalling information with 
the cognitive interview. Psychol. Aging. 2015; 30:46–61. [PubMed: 25528064] 
Dodson CS, Schacter DL. Aging and strategic retrieval processes: Reducing false memories with a 
distinctiveness heuristic. Psychol. Aging. 2002; 17:405–415. [PubMed: 12243382] 
Driscoll I, Hamilton DA, Petropoulos H, Yeo RA, Brooks WM, Baumgartner RN, Sutherland RJ. The 
aging hippocampus: Cognitive, biochemical and structural findings. Cereb. Cortex. 2003; 
13:1344–1351. [PubMed: 14615299] 
Duarte A, Graham KS, Henson RN. Age-related changes in neural activity associated with familiarity, 
recollection and false recognition. Neurobiol. Aging. 2010; 31:1814–1830. [PubMed: 19004526] 
Dulas MR, Duarte A. Aging Affects the Interaction between Attentional Control and Source Memory: 
An fMRI Study. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 2014; 26:2653–2669. [PubMed: 24800631] 
Dulas MR, Duarte A. The influence of directed attention at encoding on source memory retrieval in the 
young and old: An ERP study. Brain Res. 2013; 1500:55–71. [PubMed: 23348376] 
Dywan J, Segalowitz S, Arsenault A. Electrophysiological response during source memory decisions 
in older and younger adults. Brain Cogn. 2002; 49:322–340. [PubMed: 12139957] 
Edmonds EC, Glisky EL, Bartlett JC, Rapcsak SZ. Cognitive mechanisms of false facial recognition in 
older adults. Psychol. Aging. 2012; 27:54–60. [PubMed: 21787088] 
Elderkin-Thompson V, Ballmaier M, Hellemann G, Pham D, Kumar A. Executive function and MRI 
prefrontal volumes among healthy older adults. Neuropsychology. 2008; 22:626–637. [PubMed: 
18763882] 
Fandakova Y, Lindenberger U, Shing YL. Maintenance of youth-like processing protects against false 
memory in later adulthood. Neurobiol. Aging. 2015; 36:933–941. [PubMed: 25453561] 
Fandakova Y, Lindenberger U, Shing YL. Deficits in process-specific prefrontal and hippocampal 
activations contribute to adult age differences in episodic memory interference. Cereb. Cortex. 
2014; 24:1832–1844. [PubMed: 23425890] 
Fandakova Y, Shing YL, Lindenberger U. High-confidence memory errors in old age: The roles of 
monitoring and binding processes. Memory. 2013a; 21:732–750. [PubMed: 23305088] 
Fandakova Y, Shing YL, Lindenberger U. Differences in binding and monitoring mechanisms 
contribute to lifespan age differences in false memory. Dev. Psychol. 2013b; 49:1822–1832. 
[PubMed: 23276129] 
Farias ST, Cahn-Weiner DA, Harvey DJ, Reed BR, Mungas D, Kramer JH, Chui HC. Longitudinal 
changes in memory and executive functioning are associated with longitudinal change in 
instrumental activities of daily living in older adults. Clin. Neuropsychol. 2009; 23:446–461. 
[PubMed: 18821181] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Ferguson SA, Hashtroudi S, Johnson MK. Age differences in using source-relevant cues. Psychol. 
Aging. 1992; 7:443–452. [PubMed: 1388866] 
Fernandes M, Ross M, Wiegand M, Schryer E. Are the memories of older adults positively biased? 
Psychol. Aging. 2008; 23:297–306. [PubMed: 18573004] 
Gaesser B, Sacchetti DC, Addis DR, Schacter DL. Characterizing age-related changes in remembering 
the past and imagining the future. Psychol. Aging. 2011; 26:80–84. [PubMed: 21058863] 
Gallo DA. False memories and fantastic beliefs: 15 years of the DRM illusion. Mem. Cognit. 2010; 
38:833–848.
Gallo, DA. Associative illusions of memory: False memory research in DRM and related tasks. New 
York, NY, US: Psychology Press; 2006. 
Gallo DA, Bell D, Beier J, Schacter DL. Two types of recollection-based monitoring in younger and 
older adults: Recall-to-reject and the distinctiveness heuristic. Memory. 2006; 14:730–741. 
[PubMed: 16829489] 
Gallo DA, Cotel SC, Moore CD, Schacter DL. Aging can spare recollection-based retrieval 
monitoring: The importance of event distinctiveness. Psychol. Aging. 2007; 22:209–213. 
[PubMed: 17385996] 
Gallo DA, Foster KT, Johnson EL. Elevated False Recollection of Emotional Pictures in Young and 
Older Adults. Psychol. Aging. 2009; 24:981–988. [PubMed: 20025411] 
Gallo DA, Korthauer LE, McDonough IM, Teshale S, Johnson EL. Age-related positivity effects and 
autobiographical memory detail: Evidence from a past/future source memory task. Memory. 2011; 
19:641–652. [PubMed: 21919591] 
Gallo DA, Roediger HL. The effects of associations and aging on illusory recollection. Mem. Cognit. 
2003; 31:1036–1044.
Garry M, Polaschek DL. Imagination and memory. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2000; 9:6–10.
Gazzaley A, Cooney JW, Rissman J, D’Esposito M. Top-down suppression deficit underlies working 
memory impairment in normal aging. Nat. Neurosci. 2005; 8:1298–1300. [PubMed: 16158065] 
Gerlach KD, Dornblaser DW, Schacter DL. Adaptive constructive processes and memory accuracy: 
Consequences of counterfactual simulations in young and older adults. Memory. 2014; 22:145–
162. [PubMed: 23560477] 
Giovanello KS, Kensinger EA, Wong AT, Schacter DL. Age-related neural changes during memory 
conjunction errors. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 2010; 22:1348–1361. [PubMed: 19445606] 
Giovanello KS, Schnyer DM, Verfaellie M. A critical role for the anterior hippocampus in relational 
memory: Evidence from an fMRI study comparing associative and item recognition. 
Hippocampus. 2004; 14:5–8. [PubMed: 15058477] 
Glisky EL, Rubin SR, Davidson PSR. Source memory in older adults: An encoding or retrieval 
problem? J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 2001; 27:1131–1146. [PubMed: 11550742] 
Grady CL, McIntosh AR, Craik FIM. Age-related differences in the functional connectivity of the 
hippocampus during memory encoding. Hippocampus. 2003; 13:572–586. [PubMed: 12921348] 
Grady CL, McIntosh AR, Horwitz B, Maisog JM, Ungerleider LG, Mentis MJ, Pietrini P, Schapiro 
MB, Haxby JV. Age-related reductions in human recognition memory due to impaired encoding. 
Science (80-.). 1995; 269:218–221.
Gutchess AH, Ieuji Y, Federmeier KD. Event-related potentials reveal age differences in the encoding 
and recognition of scenes. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 2007; 19:1089–1103. [PubMed: 17583986] 
Hannula DE, Tranel D, Cohen NJ. The long and the short of it: Relational memory impairments in 
amnesia, even at short lags. J. Neurosci. 2006; 26:8352–8359. [PubMed: 16899730] 
Hasher, L.; Zacks, RT.; May, CP. Inhibitory control, circadian arousal, and age. In: Gopher, D.; Koriat, 
A., editors. Attention and Performance XVII: Cognitive Regulation of Performance: Interaction of 
Theory and Application, Attention and Performance. Cambridge, MA, US: The MIT Press; 1999. 
p. 653-675.
Hashtroudi S, Johnson MK, Chrosniak LD. Aging and qualitative characteristics of memories for 
perceived and imagined complex events. Psychol. Aging. 1990; 5:119–126. [PubMed: 2317290] 
Hashtroudi S, Johnson MK, Vnek N, Ferguson SA. Aging and the effects of affective and factual focus 
on source monitoring and recall. Psychol. Aging. 1994; 9:160–170. [PubMed: 8185863] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Healey, MK.; Campbell, KL.; Hasher, L. Cognitive aging and increased distractibility: Costs and 
potential benefits. In: Sossin, WS.; Lacaille, JC.; Castellucci, VF.; Belleville, S., editors. Essence 
of Memory. Elsevier; 2008. p. 353-363.doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(07)00022-2
Hedden T, Gabrieli JDE. Insights into the ageing mind: a view from cognitive neuroscience. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2004; 5:87–96. [PubMed: 14735112] 
Henkel LA. Maximizing the benefits and minimizing the costs of repeated memory tests for older 
adults. Psychol. Aging. 2008; 23:250–262. [PubMed: 18573001] 
Henkel LA, Johnson MK, De Leonardis DM. Aging and source monitoring: Cognitive processes and 
neuropsychological correlates. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 1998; 127:251–268. [PubMed: 9742716] 
Henson RN, Shallice T, Dolan RJ. Right prefrontal cortex and episodic memory retrieval: a functional 
MRI test of the monitoring hypothesis. Brain. 1999; 122:1367–1381. [PubMed: 10388802] 
Hintzman DL, Curran T. Retrieval dynamics of recognition and frequency judgments: Evidence for 
separate processes of familiarity and recall. J. Mem. Lang. 1994; 33:1–18.
Howe ML. The Adaptive Nature of Memory and Its Illusions. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2011; 20:312–
315.
Howe ML, Knott L. The fallibility of memory in judicial processes: Lessons from the past and their 
modern consequences. Memory. 2015; 23:633–656. [PubMed: 25706242] 
Hoyer, WJ.; Verhaeghen, P. Memory aging. In: Birren, J.; Schaie, W., editors. Handbook of the 
Psychology of Aging. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic Press; 2006. p. 209-232.
Huff MJ, Bodner GE, Fawcett JM. Effects of distinctive encoding on correct and false memory: A 
meta-analytic review of costs and benefits and their origins in the DRM paradigm. Psychon. Bull. 
Rev. 2015; 22:349–365. [PubMed: 24853535] 
Hultsch, DF.; Strauss, E.; Hunter, MA.; MacDonald, SWS. Intraindividual variability, cognition, and 
aging. In: Craik, FIM.; Salthouse, TA., editors. The Handbook of Aging and Cognition. New 
York, NY, US: Psychology Press; 2008. p. 491-556.
Iidaka T, Anderson ND, Kapur S, Cabeza R, Craik FIM. The effect of divided attention on encoding 
and retrieval in episodic memory revealed by positron emission tomography. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 
2000; 12:267–280. [PubMed: 10771411] 
Insausti R, Juottonen K, Soininen H, Insausti AM, Partanen K, Vainio P, Laakso MP, Pitkänen A. MR 
volumetric analysis of the human entorhinal, perirhinal, and temporopolar cortices. Am. J. 
Neuroradiol. 1998; 19:659–671. [PubMed: 9576651] 
Intons-Peterson MJ, Rocchi P, West T, McLellan K, Hackney A. Age, testing at preferred or 
nonpreferred times (testing optimality), and false memory. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 
1999; 25:23–40. [PubMed: 9949706] 
Jackson O III, Schacter DL. Encoding activity in anterior medial temporal lobe supports subsequent 
associative recognition. Neuroimage. 2004; 21:456–462. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2003.09.050. [PubMed: 14741683] 
Jacoby LL. Ironic effects of repetition: measuring age-related differences in memory. J. Exp. Psychol. 
Learn. Mem. Cogn. 1999; 25:3. [PubMed: 9949705] 
Jacoby LL. A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory. 
J. Mem. Lang. 1991; 30:513–541. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(91)90025-F. 
Jacoby LL, Rhodes MG. False remembering in the aged. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 2006; 15:49–53.
Jacoby LL, Wahlheim CN, Rhodes MG, Daniels KA, Rogers CS. Learning to diminish the effects of 
proactive interference: Reducing false memory for young and older adults. Mem. Cognit. 2010; 
38:820–829.
James LE, Burke DM, Austin A, Hulme E. Production and perception of “verbosity” in younger and 
older adults. Psychol. Aging. 1998; 13:355–367. [PubMed: 9793112] 
Janowsky JS, Shimamura AP, Squire LR. Source memory impairment in patients with frontal lobe 
lesions. Neuropsychologia. 1989; 27:1043–1056. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/0028-3932(89)90184-X. [PubMed: 2797412] 
Jennings JM, Jacoby LL. An opposition procedure for detecting age-related deficits in recollection: 
Telling effects of repetition. Psychol. Aging. 1997; 12:352–361. [PubMed: 9189995] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Jennings JM, Jacoby LL. Automatic versus intentional uses of memory: Aging, attention, and control. 
Psychol. Aging. 1993; 8:283–293. [PubMed: 8323731] 
Johnson MK. Memory and reality. Am. Psychol. 2006; 61:760–771. [PubMed: 17115808] 
Johnson MK, De Leonardis DM, Hashtroudi S, Ferguson SA. Aging and single versus multiple cues in 
source monitoring. Psychol. Aging. 1995; 10:507–517. [PubMed: 8749578] 
Johnson MK, Foley MA, Suengas AG, Raye CL. Phenomenal characteristics of memories for 
perceived and imagined autobiographical events. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 1988; 117:371–376. 
[PubMed: 2974863] 
Johnson MK, Hashtroudi S, Lindsay DS. Source monitoring. Psychol. Bull. 1993; 114:3–28. [PubMed: 
8346328] 
Johnson MK, Raye CL. Reality monitoring. Psychol. Rev. 1981; 94:37–64.
Jones TC, Bartlett JC. When false recognition is out of control: The case of facial conjunctions. Mem. 
Cogn. 2009; 37:143–157.
Jones TC, Jacoby LL. Conjunction errors in recognition memory: Modality-free errors for older adults 
but not for young adults. Acta Psychol. (Amst). 2005; 120:55–73. [PubMed: 15876419] 
Jones TC, Jacoby LL. Feature and conjunction errors in recognition memory: Evidence for dual-
process theory. J. Mem. Lang. 2001; 45:82–102.
Justice LV, Morrison CM, Conway MA. True and intentionally fabricated memories. Q. J. Exp. 
Psychol. 2013; 66:1196–1203.
Karpel ME, Hower WJ, Toglia MP. Accuracy and qualities of real and suggested memories: 
Nonspecific age differences. J. Gerontol. Psychol. Sci. 2001; 56:103–110.
Kensinger EA, Schacter DL. When true memories suppress false memories: Effects of ageing. Cogn. 
Neuropsychol. 1999; 16:399–415.
Kersten AW, Earles JL. Effects of aging, distraction, and response pressure on the binding of actors 
and actions. Psychol. Aging. 2010; 25:620–630. [PubMed: 20853968] 
Kersten AW, Earles JL, Upshaw C. False recollection of the role played by an actor in an event. Mem. 
Cogn. 2013; 41:1144–1158.
Kessels RPC, Hobbel D, Postma A. Aging, context memory and binding: A comparison of “what, 
where and when” in young and older adults. Int. J. Neurosci. 2007; 117:795–810. [PubMed: 
17454244] 
Kirwan CB, Stark CEL. Medial temporal lobe activation during encoding and retrieval of novel face-
name pairs. Hippocampus. 2004; 14:919–930. [PubMed: 15382260] 
Koutstaal W. Older adults encode—but do not always use—perceptual details: Intentional versus 
unintentional effects of detail on memory judgments. Psychol. Sci. 2003; 14:189–193. [PubMed: 
12661684] 
Koutstaal W, Schacter DL. Memory distortion and aging. Perspectives on Human Memory and 
Cognitive Aging: Essays in Honour of Fergus Craik. 2001:363–383.
Koutstaal W, Schacter DL. Gist-based false recognition of pictures in older and younger adults. J. 
Mem. Lang. 1997; 37:555–583. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1997.2529. 
Koutstaal W, Schacter DL, Galluccio L, Stofer KA. Reducing gist-based false recognition in older 
adults: Encoding and retrieval manipulations. Psychol. Aging. 1999; 14:220–237. [PubMed: 
10403710] 
Krendl AC, Ambady N, Kensinger EA. The dissociable effects of stereotype threat on older adults’ 
memory encoding and retrieval. J. Appl. Res. Mem. Cogn. 2015; 4:103–109. [PubMed: 
26029498] 
Kroll AEA, Knight RT, Metcalfe J, Wolf ES, Tulving E. Cohesion failure as a source of memory 
illusions. J. Mem. Lang. 1996; 35:176–196.
Kurkela KA, Dennis NA. Event-related fMRI studies of false memory: An Activation Likelihood 
Estimation meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia. 2016; 81:149–167. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2015.12.006. [PubMed: 26683385] 
Lee JLC. Reconsolidation: Maintaining memory relevance. Trends Neurosci. 2009; 32:413–420. 
[PubMed: 19640595] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 24
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Lee Y-S, Lee C-L, Yang H-T. Effects of aging and education on false memory. Int. J. Aging Hum. Dev. 
2012; 74:287–298. [PubMed: 22950349] 
Lepage M, Brodeur M, Bourgouin P. Prefrontal cortex contribution to associative recognition memory 
in humans: an event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Neurosci. Lett. 2003; 
346:73–76. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3940(03)00578-0. [PubMed: 12850551] 
Light LL, Chung C, Pendergrass R, Van Ocker JC. Effects of repetition and response deadline on item 
recognition in young and older adults. Mem. Cogn. 2006; 34:335–343.
Lindner I, Davidson PSR. False action memories in older adults: Relationship with executive 
functions? Aging, Neuropsychol. Cogn. 2014; 21:560–576.
Loftus EF. Our changeable memories: Legal and practical implications. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2003; 
4:231–234. [PubMed: 12612635] 
Lyle KB, Bloise SM, Johnson MK. Age-related binding deficits and the content of false memories. 
Psychol. Aging. 2006; 21:86–95. [PubMed: 16594794] 
MacDonald AW, Cohen JD, Stenger VA, Carter CS. Dissociating the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal 
and anterior cingulate cortex in cognitive control. Science (80-.). 2000; 288:1835–1838.
Madore KP, Addis DR, Schacter DL. Creativity and memory: Effects of an episodic-specificity 
induction on divergent thinking. Psychol. Sci. 2015; 26:1461–1468. [PubMed: 26205963] 
Madore KP, Jing HG, Schacter DL. Divergent creative thinking in young and older adults: Extending 
the effects of an episodic specificity induction. Mem. Cognit. 2016:1–15.
Madore KP, Schacter DL. An episodic specificity induction enhances means-end problem solving in 
young and older adults. Psychol. Aging. 2014; 29:913–924. [PubMed: 25365688] 
Marche TA, Jordan JJ, Owre KP. Younger adults can be more suggestible than older adults: The 
influence of learning differences on misinformation reporting. Can. J. Aging. 2002; 21:85–93.
Mather M, Carstensen LL. Aging and motivated cognition: the positivity effect in attention and 
memory. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2005; 9:496–502. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.08.005. 
[PubMed: 16154382] 
Matzen LE, Benjamin AS. Older and wiser: Older adults’ episodic word memory benefits from 
sentence study contexts. Psychol. Aging. 2013; 28:754–767. [PubMed: 23834493] 
McCabe DP, Roediger HL, McDaniel MA, Balota DA. Aging reduced veridical remembering but 
increases false remembering: Neuropsychological test correlates of remember-know judgements. 
Neuropsychologia. 2009; 47:2164–2173. [PubMed: 19100756] 
McCabe DP, Smith AD. The effect of warnings on false memories in young and older adults. Mem. 
Cogn. 2002; 30:1065–1077.
McClelland JL, McNaughton BL, O’Reilly RC. Why there are complementary learning systems in the 
hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of 
learning and memory. Psychol. Rev. 1995; 102:419–457. [PubMed: 7624455] 
McDaniel MA, Lyle KB, Butler KM, Dornburg CC. Age-related deficits in reality monitoring of action 
memories. Psychol. Aging. 2008; 23:646–656. [PubMed: 18808253] 
McDonough IM, Gallo DA. Impaired retrieval monitoring for past and future autobiographical events 
in older adults. Psychol. Aging. 2013; 28:457–466. [PubMed: 23795764] 
McDonough IM, Wong JT, Gallo DA. Age-related differences in prefrontal cortex activity during 
retrieval monitoring: Testing the compensation and dysfunction accounts. Cereb. Cortex. 2013; 
23:1049–1060. [PubMed: 22510532] 
McGinnis D, Roberts P. Qualitative characteristics of vivid memories attributed to real and imagined 
experiences. Am. J. Psychol. 1996; 109:59–77.
Meade ML, Geraci LD, Roediger HL III. Neuropsychological status in older adults influences 
susceptibility to false memories. Am. J. Psychol. 2012; 125:449–467. [PubMed: 23350303] 
Melo B, Winocur G, Moscovitch M. False recall and false recognition: An examination of the effects 
of selective and combined lesions to the medial temporal lobe/diencephalon and frontal lobe 
structures. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 1999; 16:343–359.
Memon A, Bartlett J, Rose R, Gray C. The aging eyewitness: Effects of age on face, delay, and source-
memory ability. Journals Gerontol. - Ser. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 2003; 58:338–345.
Devitt and Schacter
Page 25
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK. Source monitoring 15 years later: What have we learned from fMRI about 
the neural mechanisms of source memory? Psychol. Bull. 2009; 135:638–677. [PubMed: 
19586165] 
Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Raye CL, D’Esposito M. fMRI evidence of age-related hippocampal 
dysfunction in feature binding in working memory. Cogn. Brain Res. 2000; 10:197–206.
Mitchell KJ, Raye CL, Johnson MK, Greene EJ. An fMRI investigation of short-term source memory 
in young and older adults. Neuroimage. 2006; 30:627–633. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2005.09.039. [PubMed: 16256377] 
Moscovitch, M.; Winocur, G. The frontal cortex and working with memory. In: Stuss, DT.; Knight, 
RT., editors. Principles of Frontal Lobe Function. New York: Oxford University Press; 2002. p. 
188-209.
Moscovitch M, Winocur G. Frontal lobes, memory, and aging. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1995; 769:119–
150. [PubMed: 8595020] 
Nakazawa K, Quirk MC, Chitwood RA, Watanabe M, Yeckel MF, Sun LD, Kato A, Carr CA, Johnston 
D, Wilson MA, Tonegawa S. Requirement for hippocampal CA3 NMDA receptors in associative 
memory recall. Science (80-.). 2002; 297:211–218.
Naveh-Benjamin M. Adult age differences in memory performance: Tests of an associative deficit 
hypothesis. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 2000; 26:1170–1187. [PubMed: 11009251] 
Naveh-Benjamin M, Brav TK, Levy O. The associative memory deficit of older adults: The role of 
strategy utilization. Psychol. Aging. 2007; 22:202–208. [PubMed: 17385995] 
Naveh-Benjamin M, Hussain Z, Guez J, Bar-On M. Adult age differences in episodic memory: Further 
support for an associative-deficit hypothesis. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 2003; 29:826–
837. [PubMed: 14516216] 
Naveh-Benjamin M, Shing YL, Kilb A, Werkle-Bergner M, Lindenberger U, Li S-C. Adult age 
differences in memory for name-face associations: The effects of intentional and incidental 
learning. Memory. 2009; 17:220–232. [PubMed: 18654927] 
Newman EJ, Lindsay DS. False memories: What the hell are they for? Appl. Cogn. Psychol. 2009; 
23:1105–1121.
Norman KA, Schacter DL. False recognition in younger and older adults: Exploring the characteristics 
of illusory memories. Mem. Cognit. 1997; 25:838–848.
Nugent S, Castellano C-A, Goffaux P, Whittingstall K, Lepage M, Paquet N, Bocti C, Fulop T, 
Cunnane SC. Glucose hypometabolism is highly localized, but lower cortical thickness and brain 
atrophy are widespread in cognitively normal older adults. Am. J. Physiol. - Endocrinol. Metab. 
2014; 306:1315–1321.
O’Reilly RC, McClelland JL. Hippocampal conjunctive encoding, storage, and recall: Avoiding a 
trade-off. Hippocampus. 1994; 4:661–682. [PubMed: 7704110] 
Odegard TN, Lampinen JM. Memory conjunction errors for autobiographical events: More than just 
familiarity. Memory. 2004; 12:288–300. [PubMed: 15279433] 
Okado Y, Stark CEL. Neural activity during encoding predicts false memories created by 
misinformation. Learn. Mem. 2005; 12:3–11. [PubMed: 15687227] 
Old SR, Naveh-Benjamin M. Differential effects of age on item and associative measures of memory: 
A meta-analysis. Psychol. Aging. 2008; 23:104–118. [PubMed: 18361660] 
Ost J, Blank H, Davies J, Jones G, Lambert K, Salmon K. False memory ≠ false memory: DRM errors 
are unrelated to the misinformation effect. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e57939. [PubMed: 23573186] 
Paige LE, Cassidy BS, Schacter DL, Gutchess AH. Age differences in hippocampal activation during 
gist-based false recognition. Neurobiol. Aging. n.d. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2016.06.014. 
Pansky A, Goldsmith M, Koriat A, Pearlman-Avnion S. Memory accuracy in old age: Cognitive, 
metacognitive, and neurocognitive determinants. Eur. J. Cogn. Psychol. 2009; 21:303–329.
Park DC, Lautenschlager G, Hedden T, Davidson NS, Smith AD, Smith PK. Models of visuospatial 
and verbal memory across the adult life span. Psychol. Aging. 2002; 17:299–320. [PubMed: 
12061414] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 26
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Parkin AJ, Bindschaedler C, Harsent L, Metzler C. Pathological false alarm rates following damage to 
the left frontal cortex. Brain Cogn. 1996; 32:14–27. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/brcg.
1996.0055. [PubMed: 8899212] 
Parkin AJ, Walter BM. Recollective experience, normal aging, and frontal dysfunction. Psychol. 
Aging. 1992; 7:290–298. [PubMed: 1610518] 
Parkin AJ, Ward J, Bindschaedler C, Squires EJ, Powell G. Recognition following frontal lobe 
damage: the role of encoding factors. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 1999; 16:243–265.
Passingham, R.; Wise, S. The Neurobiology of the Prefrontal Cortex: Anatomy, Evolution, and the 
Origin of Insight. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2012. 
Persson J, Nyberg L, Lind J, Larsson A, Nilsson L, Ingvar M, Buckner RL. Structure-function 
correlates of cognitive decline in aging. Cereb. Cortex. 2006; 16:907–915. [PubMed: 16162855] 
Persson J, Pudas S, Lind J, Kauppi K, Nilsson L-G, Nyberg L. Longitudinal Structure–Function 
Correlates in Elderly Reveal MTL Dysfunction with Cognitive Decline. Cereb. Cortex. 2012; 
22:2297–2304. [PubMed: 22065863] 
Pertzov Y, Miller TD, Gorgoraptis N, Caine D, Schott JM, Butler C, Husain M. Binding deficits in 
memory following medial temporal lobe damage in patients with voltage-gated potassium 
channel complex antibody-associated limbic encephalitis. Brain. 2013; 136:2474–2485. 
[PubMed: 23757763] 
Pidgeon LM, Morcom AM. Age-related increases in false recognition: The role of perceptual and 
conceptual similarity. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2014; 6:1–17. [PubMed: 24478697] 
Pierce BH, Schacter DL, Sullivan AL, Budson AE. Comparing source-based and gist-based false 
recognition in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychology. 2005; 19:411–419. [PubMed: 
16060815] 
Pierce BH, Simons JS, Schacter DL. Aging and the seven sins of memory. Adv. Cell Aging Gerontol. 
2004; 15:1–40.
Pierce BH, Waring JD, Schacter DL, Budson AE. Effects of distinctive encoding on source-based false 
recognition: Further examination of recall-to-reject processes in aging and alzheimer disease. 
Cogn. Behav. Neurol. 2008; 21:179–186. [PubMed: 18797261] 
Piguet O, Connally E, Krendl AC, Huot JR, Corkin S. False memory in aging: Effects of emotional 
valence on word recognition accuracy. Psychol. Aging. 2008; 23:307–314. [PubMed: 18573005] 
Pitarque A, Sales A, Meléndez JC, Algarabel S. Repetition increases false recollection in older people. 
Scand. J. Psychol. 2015; 56:38–44. [PubMed: 25330138] 
Plancher G, Guyard A, Nicolas S, Piolino P. Mechanisms underlying the production of false memories 
for famous people’s names in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychologia. 2009; 47:2527–
2536. [PubMed: 19410586] 
Poppenk J, Evensmoen HR, Moscovitch M, Nadel L. Long-axis specialization of the human 
hippocampus. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2013; 17:230–240. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.
2013.03.005. [PubMed: 23597720] 
Preston AR, Eichenbaum H. Interplay of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in memory. Curr. Biol. 
2013; 23:764–773. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.041. [PubMed: 23623556] 
Prull MW, Dawes LLC, Martin AM III, Rosenberg HF, Light LL. Recollection and familiarity in 
recognition memory: Adult age differences and neuropsychological test correlates. Psychol. 
Aging. 2006; 21:107–118. [PubMed: 16594796] 
Prull, MW.; Gabrieli, JDE.; Bunge, SA. Age-related changes in memory: A cognitive neuroscience 
perspective. In: Salthouse, FIM.; A, CT., editors. The Handbook of Aging and Cognition. 2nd. 
Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers; 2000. p. 91-153.
Rahhal TA, May CP, Hasher L. Truth and character: Sources that older adults can remember. Psychol. 
Sci. 2002; 13:101–105. [PubMed: 11933991] 
Ranganath C. Binding items and contexts: The cognitive neuroscience of episodic memory. Curr. Dir. 
Psychol. Sci. 2010; 19:131–137.
Rapcsak SZ, Reminger SL, Glisky EL, Kaszniak AW, Comer JF. Neuropsychological mechanisms of 
false facial recognition following frontal lobe damage. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 1999; 16:267–292.
Devitt and Schacter
Page 27
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Raz N, Lindenberger U, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Head D, Williamson A, Dahle C, Gerstorf D, 
Acker JD. Regional brain changes in aging healthy adults: General trends, individual differences 
and modifiers. Cereb. Cortex. 2005; 15:1676–1689. [PubMed: 15703252] 
Reinitz MT, Hannigan SL. Effects of simultaneous stimulus presentation and attention switching on 
memory conjunction errors. J. Mem. Lang. 2001; 44:206–219.
Reinitz MT, Lammers WJ, Cochran BP. Memory-conjunction errors: Miscombination of stored 
stimulus features can produce illusions of memory. Mem. Cogn. 1992; 20:1–11.
Reinitz MT, Morrissey J, Demb J. Role of attention in face encoding. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. 
Cogn. 1994; 20:161–168.
Roediger HL, Geraci L. Aging and the misinformation effect: A neuropsychological analysis. J. Exp. 
Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 2007; 33:321–334. [PubMed: 17352614] 
Roediger HL, McDermott KB. Creating false memories: Remembering words not presented in lists. J. 
Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn. 1995; 21:803–814.
Rosa NM, Gutchess AH. False memory in aging resulting from self-referential processing. Journals 
Gerontol. - Ser. B Psychol. Sci. Soc. Sci. 2013; 68:882–892.
Royet J-P, Morin-Audebrand L, Cerf-Ducastel B, Haase L, Issanchou S, Murphy C, Fonlupt P, 
Sulmont-Rossé C, Plailly J. True and false recognition memories of odors induce distinct neural 
signatures. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2011; 5:65–65. [PubMed: 21811450] 
Rubin SR, Petten CV, Glisky EL, Newberg WM. Memory conjunction errors in younger and older 
adults: Event-related potential and neuropsychological data. Cogn. Neuropsychol. 1999; 16:459–
488.
Sauzéon H, N’Kaoua B, Arvind Pala P, Taillade M, Guitton P. Age and active navigation effects on 
episodic memory: A virtual reality study. Br. J. Psychol. 2016; 107:72–94. [PubMed: 26756717] 
Schacter, DL. The seven sins of memory: How the mind forgets and remembers. Boston and New 
York: Houghton Mifflin; 2001. 
Schacter DL, Addis DR. The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: Remembering the past 
and imagining the future. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 2007; 362:773–786.
Schacter DL, Curran T, Galluccio L, Milberg WP, Bates JF. False recognition and the right frontal 
lobe: A case study. Neuropsychologia. 1996; 34:793–808. doi:http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/0028-3932(95)00165-4. [PubMed: 8817509] 
Schacter DL, Gaesser B, Addis DR. Remembering the past and imagining the future in the elderly. 
Gerontology. 2013; 59:143–151. [PubMed: 22987157] 
Schacter DL, Guerin SA, St Jacques PL. Memory distortion: An adaptive perspective. Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 2011; 15:467–474. [PubMed: 21908231] 
Schacter DL, Israel L, Racine C. Suppressing false recognition in younger and older adults: The 
distinctiveness heuristic. J. Mem. Lang. 1999; 40:1–24. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jmla.
1998.2611. 
Schacter DL, Kaszniak AW, Kihlstrom JF, Valdiserri M. The relation between source memory and 
aging. Psychol. Aging. 1991
Schacter DL, Koutstaal W, Norman KA. False memories and aging. Trends Cogn. Sci. 1997; 1:229–
236. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(97)01068-1. [PubMed: 21223912] 
Schacter DL, Loftus EF. Memory and law: what can cognitive neuroscience contribute? Nat. Neurosci. 
2013; 16:119–123. [PubMed: 23354384] 
Schacter DL, Norman KA, Koutstaal W. The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory. Annu. 
Rev. Psychol. 1998; 49:289–318. [PubMed: 9496626] 
Schlichting ML, Preston AR. Memory integration: neural mechanisms and implications for behavior. 
Curr. Opin. Behav. Sci. 2015; 1:1–8. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2014.07.005. 
[PubMed: 25750931] 
Sheldon S, McAndrews MP, Moscovitch M. Episodic memory processes mediated by the medial 
temporal lobes contribute to open-ended problem solving. Neuropsychologia. 2011; 49:2439–
2447. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.04.021. [PubMed: 21550352] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 28
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Shing YL, Rodrigue KM, Kennedy KM, Fandakova Y, Bodammer N, Werkle-Bergner M, 
Lindenberger U, Raz N. Hippocampal subfield volumes: Age, vascular risk, and correlation with 
associative memory. Front. Aging Neurosci. 2011; 3:1–8. [PubMed: 21442044] 
Shing YL, Werkle-Bergner M, Li S-C, Lindenberger U. Committing memory errors with high 
confidence: Older adults do but children don’t. Memory. 2009; 17:169–179. [PubMed: 
18608975] 
Simons JS, Spiers HJ. Prefrontal and medial temporal lobe interactions in long-term memory. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2003; 4:637–648. [PubMed: 12894239] 
Simons JS, Verfaellie M, Galton CJ, Miller BL, Hodges JR, Graham KS. Recollection based memory 
in frontotemporal dementia: implications for theories of long-term memory. Brain. 2002; 
125:2523–2536. [PubMed: 12390977] 
Skinner EI, Fernandes MA. Illusory recollection in older adults and younger adults under divided 
attention. Psychol. Aging. 2009; 24:211–216. [PubMed: 19290753] 
Slotnick SD, Moo LR, Segal JB, Hart J Jr. Distinct prefrontal cortex activity associated with item 
memory and source memory for visual shapes. Cogn. Brain Res. 2003; 17:75–82. doi:http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0926-6410(03)00082-X. 
Smith RE, Reed Hunt R, Dunlap KR. Why do pictures, but not visual words, reduce older adults’ false 
memories? Psychol. Aging. 2015; 30:647–655. [PubMed: 26213799] 
Sommers MS, Huff LM. The Effects of Age and Dementia of the Alzheimer’s Type on Phonological 
False Memories. Psychol. Aging. 2003; 18:791–806. [PubMed: 14692865] 
Spencer WD, Raz N. Differential effects of aging on memory for content and context: A meta-analysis. 
Psychol. Aging. 1995; 10:527–539. [PubMed: 8749580] 
St. Jacques PL, Montgomery D, Schacter DL. Modifying memory for a museum tour in older adults: 
Reactivation-related updating that enhances and distorts memory is reduced in ageing. Memory. 
2015; 23:876–887. [PubMed: 24993055] 
St. Jacques PL, Rubin DC, Cabeza R. Age-related effects on the neural correlates of autobiographical 
memory retrieval. Neurobiol. Aging. 2012; 33:1298–1310. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neurobiolaging.2010.11.007. [PubMed: 21190759] 
Stuss DT, Alexander M, HAMER L, Palumbo C, Dempster R, Binns M, Levine B, Izukawa D. The 
effects of focal anterior and posterior brain lesions on verbal fluency. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 
1998; 4:265–278. [PubMed: 9623001] 
Stuss DT, Craik FIM, Sayer L, Franchi D, Alexander MP. Comparison of older people and patients 
with frontal lesions: Evidence from word list learning. Psychol. Aging. 1996; 11:387–395. 
[PubMed: 8893308] 
Stuss DT, Floden D, Alexander MP, Levine B, Katz D. Stroop performance in focal lesion patients: 
dissociation of processes and frontal lobe lesion location. Neuropsychologia. 2001; 39:771–786. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(01)00013-6. [PubMed: 11369401] 
Stuss DT, Levine B, Alexander MP, Hong J, Palumbo C, Hamer L, Murphy KJ, Izukawa D. Wisconsin 
Card Sorting Test performance in patients with focal frontal and posterior brain damage: effects 
of lesion location and test structure on separable cognitive processes. Neuropsychologia. 2000; 
38:388–402. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00093-7. [PubMed: 10683390] 
Suengas AG, Johnson MK. Qualitative effects of rehearsal on memories for perceived and imagined 
complex events. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 1988; 117:377–389.
Swick D, Senkfor AJ, Van Petten C. Source memory retrieval is affected by aging and prefrontal 
lesions: Behavioral and ERP evidence. Brain Res. 2006; 1107:161–176. [PubMed: 16828722] 
Teyler TJ, Rudy JW. The hippocampal indexing theory and episodic memory: Updating the index. 
Hippocampus. 2007; 17:1158–1169. [PubMed: 17696170] 
Thapar A, Westerman DL. Aging and fluency-based illusions in recognition memory. Psychol. Aging. 
2009; 24:595–603. [PubMed: 19739915] 
Thomas AK, Bulevich JB. Effective cue utilization reduces memory errors in older adults. Psychol. 
Aging. 2006; 21:379–389. [PubMed: 16768582] 
Thomas AK, McDaniel MA. The interaction between frontal functioning and encoding processes in 
reducing false memories. Aging, Neuropsychol. Cogn. 2013; 20:443–470.
Devitt and Schacter
Page 29
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tisserand DJ, van Boxtel MPJ, Pruessner JC, Hofman P, Evens AC, Jolles J. A voxel-based 
morphometric study to determine individual differences in gray matter density associated with 
age and cognitive change over time. Cereb. Cortex. 2004; 14:973–996.
Troyer AK, Moscovitch M, Winocur G, Alexander MP, Stuss DT. Clustering and switching on verbal 
fluency: The effects of focal frontal- and temporal-lobe lesions. Neuropsychologia. 1998; 
36:499–504. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0028-3932(97)00152-8. [PubMed: 9705059] 
Tsukiura T, Shigemune Y, Nouchi R, Kambara T, Kawashima R. Age-related differences in prefrontal, 
parietal, and hippocampal activations during correct rejections of faces. Jpn. Psychol. Res. 2014; 
56:2–14.
Tulving E. Memory and consciousness. Can. Psychol. 1985; 26:1–12.
Tun PA, Wingfield A, Rosen MJ, Blanchard L. Response latencies for false memories: Gist-based 
processes in normal aging. Psychol. Aging. 1998; 13:230–241. [PubMed: 9640584] 
Umanath S, Dolan PO, Marsh EJ. Ageing and the Moses Illusion: Older adults fall for Moses but if 
asked directly, stick with Noah. Memory. 2014; 22:481–492. [PubMed: 23705952] 
Umanath S, Marsh EJ. Aging and the memorial consequences of catching contradictions with prior 
knowledge. Psychol. Aging. 2012; 27:1033–1038. [PubMed: 22308998] 
Uncapher MR, Rugg MD. Effects of divided attention on fMRI correlates of memory encoding. J. 
Cogn. Neurosci. 2005; 17:1923–1935. [PubMed: 16356329] 
Vannucci M, Mazzoni G, Marchetti I, Lavezzini F. “It’s a hair-dryer...No, it's a drill” 
Misidentification-related false recognitions in younger and older adults. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr. 
2012; 54:310–316. [PubMed: 21871676] 
Watson JM, McDermott KB, Balota DA. Attempting to avoid false memories in the Deese/Roediger—
McDermott paradigm: Assessing the combined influence of practice and warnings in young and 
old adults. Mem. Cognit. 2004; 32:135–141.
Werheid K, Gruno M, Kathmann N, Fischer H, Almkvist O, Winblad B. Biased recognition of positive 
faces in aging and amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Psychol. Aging. 2010; 25:1–15. 
[PubMed: 20230123] 
West RL. An application of prefrontal cortex function theory to cognitive aging. Psychol. Bull. 1996; 
120:272–292. [PubMed: 8831298] 
Wilson IA, Gallagher M, Eichenbaum H, Tanila H. Neurocognitive aging: prior memories hinder new 
hippocampal encoding. Trends Neurosci. 2006; 29:662–670. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.
2006.10.002. [PubMed: 17046075] 
Wong JT, Gallo DA. Stereotype threat reduces false recognition when older adults are forewarned. 
Memory. 2015; 24:650–658. [PubMed: 26218527] 
Wylie, LE.; Patihis, L.; McCuller, LL.; Davis, D.; Brank, E.; Loftus, EF.; Bornstein, B. Misinformation 
effect in older versus younger adults: A meta-analysis and review. In: Tolglia, MP.; Ross, DF.; 
Pozzulo, J.; Pica, E., editors. The Elderly Eyewitness in Court. UK: Psychology Press; 2014. p. 
38-66.
Yassa MA, Lacy JW, Stark SM, Albert MS, Gallagher M, Stark CEL. Pattern separation deficits 
associated with increased hippocampal CA3 and dentate gyrus activity in nondemented older 
adults. Hippocampus. 2011a; 21:968–979. [PubMed: 20865732] 
Yassa MA, Mattfeld AT, Stark SM, Stark CEL. Age-related memory deficits linked to circuit-specific 
disruptions in the hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011b; 108:8873–8878. [PubMed: 
21555581] 
Yonelinas AP. The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30 Years of research. J. Mem. 
Lang. 2002; 46:441–517.
Yonelinas AP, Widaman K, Mungas D, Reed BR, Weiner MW, Chui HC. Memory in the aging brain: 
Doubly dissociating the contribution of the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex. Hippocampus. 
2007; 17:1134–1140. [PubMed: 17636547] 
Zeidman P, Maguire EA. Anterior hippocampus: the anatomy of perception, imagination and episodic 
memory. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2016; 17:173–182. [PubMed: 26865022] 
Zhu B, Chen C, Loftus EF, Lin C, Dong Q. The relationship between DRM and misinformation false 
memories. Mem. Cognit. 2013; 41:832–838.
Devitt and Schacter
Page 30
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Zhu B, Chen C, Loftus EF, Lin C, He Q, Chen C, Li H, Xue G, Lu Z, Dong Q. Individual differences 
in false memory from misinformation: Cognitive factors. Memory. 2010; 18:543–555. [PubMed: 
20623420] 
Devitt and Schacter
Page 31
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Highlights
•
Review of behavioral and neuroimaging research on false memories 
and healthy aging
•
Multifaceted cognitive changes contribute to false memory increase 
with age
•
Age-related medial temporal and prefrontal decline play a prominent 
role
•
Neural changes result in impaired associative memory and strategic 
monitoring
Devitt and Schacter
Page 32
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript