Complementarity in False Memory Illusions
C J. Brainerd and V. F. Reyna
Department of Human Development and Human Neuroscience Institute, Cornell University
Abstract
For some years, the DRM illusion has been the most widely studied form of false memory. The 
consensus theoretical interpretation is that the illusion is a reality reversal, in which certain new 
words (critical distractors) are remembered as though they are old list words rather than as what 
they are—new words that are similar to old ones. This reality-reversal interpretation is supported 
by compelling lines of evidence, but prior experiments are limited by the fact that their memory 
tests only asked whether test items were old. We removed that limitation by also asking whether 
test items were new-similar. This more comprehensive methodology revealed that list words and 
critical distractors are remembered quite differently. Memory for list words is compensatory: They 
are remembered as old at high rates and remembered as new-similar at very low rates. In contrast, 
memory for critical distractors is complementary: They are remembered as both old and new-
similar at high rates, which means that the DRM procedure induces a complementarity illusion 
rather than a reality reversal. The conjoint recognition model explains complementarity as a 
function of three retrieval processes (semantic familiarity, target recollection, and context 
recollection), and it predicts that complementarity can be driven up or down by varying the mix of 
those processes. Our experiments generated data on that prediction and introduced a convenient 
statistic, the complementarity ratio, which measures (a) the level of complementarity in memory 
performance and (b) whether its direction is reality-consistent or reality-reversed.
Keywords
DRM illusion; complementarity; conjoint recognition; target recollection; context recollection
False memory phenomena have figured centrally in a broad range of research domains. At 
one time or another, they have been prominent topics in abnormal psychology (e.g., 
McNally, Clancy, & Schacter, 2001), aging and dementia (e.g., Budson et al., 2006), autism 
spectrum disorders (e.g., Beversdorf et al., 2000), criminology (e.g., Wells et al., 1998), 
developmental psychology (e.g., Bouwmeester & Verkoeijen, 2010), differential psychology 
(e.g., Gallo, 2010), cognitive neuroscience (e.g., Dennis, Bowman, & Vandekar, 2012), 
pediatric psychology (e.g., Goodman, Quas, Batterman-Faunce, Riddlesberger, & Kuhn, 
1994), psychotherapy (e.g., Poole, Lindsay, Memon, & Bull, 1995), special education (e.g., 
Weekes, Hamilton, Oakhill, & Holliday, 2007), and of course, mainstream memory research 
Corresponding author: C J. Brainerd, G331 MVR Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, 607-254-1163, cb299@cornell.edu. 
Revision of XGE-2017-0155R1 as invited by the action editor, Nelson Cowan.
The corpus of conjoint recognition data sets in Experiment 1 were previously discussed in Brainerd, Gomes, and Moran (2014). There, 
model fit analyses and factor analyses of the model’s parameter space were reported.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
J Exp Psychol Gen. 2018 March ; 147(3): 305–327. doi:10.1037/xge0000381.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(for a review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). Although a wide assortment of procedures has 
been implemented, there are two preeminent methodologies, the misinformation paradigm 
(Loftus, 1975) and the Deese/Roediger/McDermott (DRM; Deese, 1959; Roediger & 
McDermott, 1995) illusion. Loftus’ misinformation procedure was dominant in early 
research, owing to a focus on the effects of manipulative interviewing practices in police 
investigations and psychotherapy, but more recently, the DRM illusion has become the 
dominant methodology (for reviews, see Gallo, 2006, 2010; Brainerd, Reyna, & Zember, 
2011).
From a practical point of view, the DRM illusion’s preeminence is easily understood. It 
combines high efficiency in the production of false memories with great simplicity and 
adaptability. The core methodology is summarized in Table 1, where it can be seen that the 
illusion consists of falsely remembering words that were not presented on lists of related 
words. With respect to efficiency, levels of false memory are quite high, relative to most 
other paradigms, especially for the new-similar words in Table 1 that are labeled “strong.” 
Concerning simplicity, only a brief induction phase, in which subjects encode a few short 
lists, is required to achieve high levels of false memory. Indeed, reliable levels of false 
memory have been detected a few seconds after the presentation of a single four-word DRM 
list (Atkins & Reuter-Lorenz, 2011). Concerning adaptability, the core methodology is so 
flexible that it can be adjusted to meet the requirements of most experimental designs. This 
includes the very restrictive requirements of fMRI studies (see Dennis, Bowman, & 
Vandekar, 2012; Kurkela & Dennis, 2016) and studies of cognitively impaired populations 
(see Brainerd, Forrest, Karibian, & Reyna, 2006; Budson et al., 2006).
The dominance of the DRM procedure means that much of our knowledge about false 
memory is now tied to that paradigm, and hence, it is essential to understand exactly what 
type of illusion it creates. It might be thought that this question has long since been 
answered, by what we shall call the reality-reversal hypothesis. According to that notion, 
DRM lists foment reversals in the perceived reality states of certain types of new-similar 
(NS) items—the strong NS items in Table 1, which are usually called critical distractors or 
critical lures. Specifically, after list presentation, list items and strong NS items are both 
perceived to be old on memory tests, rather than list items being perceived as old and strong 
NS items being perceived as new-similar. This reality-reversal hypothesis, which is 
exemplified by the label “DRM illusion,” has become the consensus interpretation by virtue 
of some compelling lines of evidence.
Consider four examples. First, not only are raw false alarm probabilities high (e.g., the bias-
corrected mean is .39 for the DRM lists in the Roediger, Watson, McDermott, & Gallo, 
2001, norms), they approach hit rates for list items. To illustrate, Gallo (2006, Table 4.1) 
reviewed 36 sets of data in which the mean false alarm rate was within ±.02 of the mean hit 
rate, and Stadler, Roediger, and McDermott (1999) identified 18 DRM lists for which the 
mean false alarm rate did not differ reliably from the mean hit rate. Second, when subjects 
introspect on the conscious experiences that items stimulate on memory tests, critical 
distractors and list items both provoke reports of realistic study-phase details at high levels, 
and confidence ratings for false alarms approach those for hits (for a review, see Arndt, 
2012). Across the data sets that Gallo reviewed, for example, false alarms and hits provoked 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

recollection of realistic details (e.g., voices in which lists were spoken, fonts in which they 
were printed) 57% and 65% of the time, respectively (see also, Prohaska, DelValle, Toglia, 
& Pittman, 2016). Third, the brain regions whose activity is correlated with DRM true and 
false memory have been investigated in fMRI studies (e.g., Atkins & Reuter-Lorenz, 2011), 
and the modal finding is substantial overlap among those regions. Here, Dennis et al. (2012) 
reviewed medial temporal, parietal, and frontal regions that exhibit such overlap. Fourth, 
several experiments have been conducted in which investigators enriched memory test 
instructions with explicit warnings about the types of NS items that subjects are apt to 
mistake for old (O) items and with examples of the qualities of retrieved memories that can 
be used to discriminate them (e.g., Gallo et al,, 1997). The modal finding is that such 
warnings produce only small reductions in false alarms to critical distractors (Brainerd & 
Reyna, 2005).
Such evidence seems to add up to convincing proof that following list presentation, the 
perceived reality states of critical distractors and list items are indistinguishable to subjects: 
Both are remembered as belonging to the old state. However, support for this reality-reversal 
hypothesis is limited by how memory performance has been measured—explicitly, by the 
ubiquitous practice of only measuring whether subjects perceive that test items are old—
without regard to whether they may also perceive that such items belong to other, logically 
incompatible, reality states. This practice generates data that speak to whether critical 
distractors and list items are both remembered as old when the task is to judge whether they 
belong to that state (O? tests), but not to whether they are both remembered as old when the 
task is to judge whether they belong to the complementary new-similar state (NS? tests). 
The minimum rational condition for confirmation of the reality-reversal hypothesis is that 
performance is compensatory across these incompatible judgments (Brainerd & Reyna, 
2005). More particularly, pools of list words will exhibit high hit rates (O? tests) coupled 
with very low false alarm rates (NS? tests), and pools of critical distractors will exhibit high 
false alarm rates (O? tests) coupled with very low hit rates (NS? tests).
However, a theoretical case can be made that this will not happen, and instead, performance 
will be compensatory for list items but complementarity (high false alarm and hit rates) for 
critical distractors. This possibility falls out of one of the main theoretical accounts of false 
memory, fuzzy-trace theory (FTT), which posits that memory can be noncompensatory over 
mutually incompatible judgments as a by-product of storing dissociated verbatim and gist 
traces that favor different reality states (Brainerd, Wang, Reyna, & Nakamura, 2015). There 
is another recent theory that makes related dual-trace assumptions, Nelson and Shiffrin’s 
(2013) storing-and-retrieving-knowledge-and-events (SARKAE) model. FTT and SARKAE 
differ in several particulars, and they evolved from different experimental traditions, but they 
share two fundamental principles. First, both of them posit that episodic memory generates 
two types of traces, verbatim and gist traces in the case of FTT or item and knowledge traces 
in the case of SARKAE. Second, both theories use dual traces to explain dissociations in 
performance on traditional memory tests, which focus on the distinction between old and 
new, and on memory tests that focus on other content, such as meaning or inference.
In this article, we investigate whether DRM lists actually induce a reality-reversal illusion or 
whether, instead, they induce a complementarity illusion. We begin by discussing the notion 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of memory compensation among incompatible reality states and consider the fact that 
although intuition favors compensation, some familiar theoretical distinctions about 
verbatim and gist memory predict that NS items could display complementarity. In 
subsequent sections, we present a series of experiments that evaluated compensation versus 
complementarity for NS items by determining whether the known tendency of critical 
distractors to be falsely remembered at high rates on O? tests means that they are not 
correctly remembered at high rates on NS? tests. As an advance organizer, the answer will 
prove to be no. The type of false memory illusion that DRM lists are found to induce, then, 
is something more novel than reality reversal—namely, complementarity, in which both 
false alarm rates and hit rates are high for critical distractors. In contrast, compensation 
dominates memory for list items (high hit rates and low false alarm rates). Thus, although 
memory for critical distractors may be largely indistinguishable from memory for list items 
on O? tests, the two prove to be quite distinctive when data from both O? and NS? tests are 
analyzed.
Compensation and Complementarity in False Memory
We now sketch some familiar memory mechanisms that could move memory for NS items 
away from compensation toward complementarity. It will turn out that complementarity 
emerges from two distinctions. First, some NS items will be perceived as belonging to both 
the O and NS states, despite their incompatibility, by virtue of a retrieval processed that is 
called semantic familiarity. Second, a pair of recollective phenomenologies operate in the 
DRM paradigm, one (target recollection) that involves vivid reinstatement of specific list 
items and another (context recollection) that involves reinstatement of realistic details that 
accompany the presentation of DRM lists (Brainerd, Gomes, & Moran, 2014). These two 
forms of recollection generate contrasting perceptions of NS items’ reality states. The 
perceived state is new-similar for target recollection but is old for context recollection, 
allowing items that induce context recollection to be remembered as old on both O? and NS? 
probes while allowing other items that induce target recollection to be remembered new-
similar on both O? and NS? probes Thus, it is easy to see that the two recollections will 
produce similar false alarm and hit rates (complementarity) for critical distractors to the 
extent that their memory effects are comparable.
Dual Recollection Processes in False Memory
It is traditional in false memory experiments to test memory for items from three reality 
states: O (e.g., table, rest, mad in the left column of Table 1), NS (e.g., chair, sleep, anger in 
the middle column of Table 1), and new-different (ND) (e.g., music, soft, thief in the right 
column of Table 1). The task is merely to decide whether each type of item maps with the O 
state, which we refer to as O? probes. Affirmative judgments for NS items count as false 
memories, affirmative judgments for O items count as true memories, and affirmative 
judgments for ND items count as response bias and are used to adjust the first two types of 
responses for the influence of bias. Suppose that the task is expanded to include NS? probes, 
so that subjects also decide whether the same three types of items map with the logically 
incompatible NS state. Now, affirmative judgments for NS items count as true memories, 
affirmative judgments for O items count as false memories, and affirmative judgments for 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ND items still count as response bias. For pools of NS items, what should the relation be 
between affirmative judgments on O? and NS? probes?
The intuitive answer is compensation. Because O and NS are mutually incompatible reality 
states, our naïve intuition is that if the tendency to judge items such as chair and anger as old 
on O? probes is high, the tendency to judge them as new-similar on NS? probes will be low, 
and conversely. Although this intuition is powerful, we mentioned that FTT anticipates that 
it may be wrong empirically, owing to the fact that subjects store traces of list words that are 
consistent with both the O and NS states. Specifically, subjects are assumed to store 
verbatim traces of individual list words and gist traces of their semantic content, especially 
meanings that connect different words (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995). According to FTT, 
connecting meaning across different words is central to the illusion. Here, Brainerd, Yang, 
Howe, Reyna, and Mills (2008) and Cann, McRae, and Katz (2011) noted three semantic 
properties of the DRM paradigm. First, list words share salient meanings (e.g., two-thirds of 
the words on the chair list are household furniture; two-thirds of the words on the anger list 
are emotions). These authors noted that as a group, DRM lists exemplify six distinct types of 
semantic relations. Second, critical distractors are very familiar exemplars of those shared 
meanings. Third, false memory increases as the number of list words that share a salient 
meaning with the critical distractor increases (Cann et al., 2011). The third property also 
holds for other types of semantically-related lists, such as categorized lists (Brainerd & 
Reyna, 2007; Dewhurst, 2001).
Brainerd et al. (2015) pointed out that in false memory experiments, whether or not 
performance is compensatory across probes for incompatible reality states is a multi-
dimensional proposition that depends on the mix of verbatim and gist retrieval, which 
generates three subjective reactions to test items: (a) semantic familiarity, (b) target 
recollection, and (c) context recollection. Taking semantic familiarity first, a key property of 
the meaning information in gist traces is that it supports complementary perceptions of 
incompatible reality states, for both O and NS items. Consider the chair and anger lists 
(Table 1, left column), which produce verbatim traces of table, couch, desk, ..., verbatim 
traces of mad, fear, hate, ..., and gist traces of these words’ semantic content. Because 
semantic information is congruent with any exemplar of a target meaning, regardless of 
whether the exemplar was presented, it supports contradictory responses to O? and NS? 
probes. For instance, the “household furniture” and “emotion” meanings are consistent with 
chair and anger being O (there are many exemplars of those concepts on the respective lists) 
and also with them being NS (many exemplars of those concepts were not on the respective 
lists). Thus, when the phenomenology is semantic familiarity, individual items can be 
perceived as a simultaneously occupying both the O and NS reality states. However, as we 
now show, complementarity can also result when individual items are perceived as 
occupying only one of these states because the state is different for target recollection than 
for context recollection.
Taking target recollection first, it is a by-product of retrieving verbatim traces of list items. It 
is compensatory across incompatible reality states, for individual O and NS items, because 
verbatim traces identify particular items as having been present on the study list, causing O 
items to be perceived as old and NS items to be perceived as new-similar. Hence, processing 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

verbatim traces of, say, table and mad supports acceptance of NS? probes and rejection of 
O? probes for chair and anger, while simultaneously supporting acceptance of O? probes 
and rejection of NS? probes for table and mad, because the latter are perceived to old and the 
former are perceived to be new-similar. In the false memory literature, the rejection halves of 
these paired judgments have been widely studied, where they are usually called recollection 
rejection or recall-to-reject (e.g., Lampinen & Odegard, 2006).
Turing to context recollection, this form of recollection was emphasized by Jacoby (1991) in 
his process dissociation model, which measures subjects’ ability to distinguish items that 
were presented on different lists via conscious reinstatement of contextual details that 
differentiate the lists (e.g., visual vs. oral presentation). More recent work has shown that 
some gist traces are compensatory because they recruit realistic study-phase contextual 
details when they are retrieved (Brainerd et al., 2014). Here, several findings suggest that 
gist traces sometimes recruit vivid recollective support for test items, in the form of 
contextual details that accompanied list presentation, and this process has been tied to the 
high levels of phantom recollective phenomenology that subjects experience for critical 
distractors (for a review, see Arndt, 2012). These particular gist traces are compensatory 
because they identify both O and NS items, not just O items, as being O and not NS. Note 
that for NS items, this is a reality reversal, but for O items it is reality-consistent. Note, too, 
that for NS items, context recollection induces a perceived reality state that is logically 
incompatible with the reality state that target recollection induces.
A key point about target and context recollection is that although we have seen that they are 
compensatory, paradoxically they are jointly complementary. Obviously, they will produce 
complementarity for a pool of NS items (i.e., similar hit and false alarm rates) when the 
effects of the two recollections are roughly comparable; that is, when the percentage of NS 
items that provokes target recollection is roughly the same as the percentage that provokes 
context recollection. In contrast, O items are not subject to this paradox because, as we saw, 
the two recollections are both individually and jointly compensatory for such items. The 
denouement is that complementarity should occur at far higher rates for NS items than for O 
items. For the latter, only semantic similarity can produce it (because individual items will 
be perceived as being both O and NS). For NS items, however, complementarity can be 
produced by semantic familiarity and by the countervailing effects of target and context 
recollection.
Conjoint Recognition
A model is required in order to spell out exactly how these processes combine to generate 
responses to O? and NS? probes. The relevant model is conjoint recognition, and it is known 
to fit DRM data well (Bouwmeester & Verkoeijen, 2010; Brainerd & Wright, 2005; for a 
review, see Brainerd et al, 2014). The conjoint recognition model contains parameters that 
disentangle the effects of the three processes by defining them over O? and NS? probes and 
also over a third type of probe that is analogous to inclusion tests in the process dissociation 
paradigm (O-or-NS?) To see how that works for NS items, consider the bias-corrected 
expressions for accepting O? and NS? probes:
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(1)
(2)
where SNS, R, and P are the probabilities of semantic familiarity, recollection rejection, and 
phantom recollection, respectively. Recollection rejection and phantom recollection are 
forms of performance that are produced by different recollective processes: Recollection 
rejection is the act of both rejecting O? probes and accepting NS? probes by virtue of target 
recollection, and phantom recollection the act of doing the opposite by virtue of context 
recollection (Brainerd et al., 2014). Two conclusions about complementarity emerge from 
these expressions. First, a pool of NS items will exhibit at least partial complementarity [i.e., 
the mean values of pNS(O?) and pNS(NS?) will both be > 0] as long as SNS > 0 and the other 
two parameters are < 1. Second, complete complementarity [i.e., the mean values of 
pNS(O?) and pNS(NS?) will both be > 0 and will be roughly equal], can also occur because 
certain combinations of the values of R and P will produce it—even though, paradoxically, 
the processes that these parameters measure are individually compensatory. Explicitly, note 
that whether NS items exhibit complete complementarity [i.e., pNS(O?) = pNS(NS?)] or 
strong complementarity [i.e., pNS(O?) ≈ pNS(NS?)] cannot depend on SNS because the term 
(1− R)(1− P)SNS vanishes when pNS(NS?) is subtracted from pNS(O?). That subtraction 
leaves pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) = (1−R)R − P, which means that performance will be 
completely complementary whenever P = R/(1−R).
The exact quantitative tradeoff between levels of complementarity and values of these 
parameters is shown in Figure 1. This curve represents the paired values of P and R that, for 
a pool of NS items, will produce equivalent mean values of pNS(O?) and pNS(NS?), even 
though individual items are perceived to occupy O state and not the NS state by virtue of 
context recollection, or the NS state and not the O state by virtue of target recollection. To 
the right and left of the curve are, respectively, the regions in which performance for NS 
items is partially complementary and reality-consistent [because pNS(O?) < pNS(NS?)] 
versus partially complementary and reality-reversed [because pNS(O?) > pNS(NS?)]. It can 
be seen that reality reversal occurs for a smaller region of the R-P coordinate space than 
reality consistency and that it cannot occur whenever R > .5.
Turning to O items, we mentioned that for such items, target and context recollection are 
both reality-consistent. The model’s expressions for accepting O? and NS? probes for these 
items are:
(3)
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(4)
where SO is the probability of semantic familiarity and RO is the combined probability of the 
two forms of recollection (i.e., it is the probability of accepting O? probes and rejecting NS 
probes due to target recollection or context recollection). It is easy to see that observing 
complete or strong complementarity for targets rests on RO being 0 or close to it, which will 
be rare events. Also, note another feature of Equations 3 and 4 that reinforces our earlier 
comment that complementarity is far more likely for NS items than for O items. For O 
items, the relation between pO(O?) and pO(NS?) is constrained such that pO(O?) ≥ pO(NS?) 
because RO + (1−RO)SO, ≥ (1− RO)SO. The relation between pNS(O?) and pNS(NS?) is not 
similarly constrained; it will turn on the relative magnitudes of R and P.
Complementarity in Judgment and Decision Making
Complementarity has not been a topic of focused research in the memory literature, and as 
we saw, it violates our naïve intuition that episodic memory ought to be compensatory 
across judgments about incompatible reality states. In that light, it is useful to remind 
ourselves, before moving on to data, that there are established instances of complementarity 
in other areas of cognitive psychology—most notably in the judgment and decision making 
literature.
Preference reversals (e.g., Slovic & Lichtenstein, 1983; Tversky, Slovic, & Kahneman, 
1990) are classic examples. Similar to memory complementarity, subjects exhibit such 
reversals by affirming logically contradictory preference states for the same item, on slightly 
different probes. A textbook illustration involves one group of subjects affirming a 
preference for option A over option B, when choosing between them on one type of probe, 
but another group of subjects affirming a preference for B over A when choosing between 
them on another type of probe. For instance, suppose that subjects read descriptions of 
various features of apartment A and apartment B—location, age, size, distance from subway 
stations, and so on. Half the subjects express their preference by indicating which apartment 
they would be willing to live in, and the other half express their preference by indicating 
which apartment they would be willing to pay more rent for. The apartment with the higher 
average preference on the first task is the opposite of the apartment with the higher average 
preference on the second task (Corbin, Reyna, Weldon, & Brainerd, 2015). A further parallel 
with memory complementarity is that preference reversals have been tied to the mix of 
verbatim and gist retrieval on these probes (Stone, Yates, & Parker, 1994).
Overview of Experiments
In Experiment 1, we investigated whether DRM lists and other common false memory 
materials induce reality-reversal illusions or complementarity illusions with a large corpus of 
conjoint recognition data sets; that is, whether that average value of pNS(O?) for critical 
distractors is far higher than the average value of pO(NS?) or whether they are more 
comparable. We introduce a quantitative index, the complementarity ratio. This is a 
convenient statistic that simultaneously conveys information about the level of 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

complementarity in performance and about whether its direction is reality-consistent or 
reality-reversed. For DRM data sets, the corpus allowed levels of complementarity for strong 
NS items, weak NS items, and O items to be averaged across many experiments and a range 
of experimental conditions. For other false memory tasks, the corpus allowed us to compare 
the levels of complementarity for other common procedures to DRM levels.
In Experiments 2 and 3, we determined whether the group-level results from Experiment 1 
generalized to individual subjects. The subjects studied large numbers of DRM lists and 
responded to both O? and NS? probes about test items. The individual-level results were 
similar to the group results. The next experiment was a housekeeping study in which we 
considered whether the high levels of complementarity that were observed for recognition in 
the first three experiments are also observed for recall.
In Experiments 5 and 6, we attempted to gain experimental control of complementarity with 
theoretically-derived manipulations. According to Equations 1 and 2, complementarity can 
be forced in a reality-consistent direction by increasing target recollection (parameter R), 
relative to some baseline condition, and complementarity can be forced in a reality-reversed 
direction by decreasing target recollection. We investigated a manipulation of the former sort 
in Experiment 5 (repetition) and a manipulation of the latter sort in Experiment 6 (speeded 
retrieval).
Experiment 1
The aim of this experiment was to secure baseline findings on the type of illusion that DRM 
lists induce by determining the degree to which memory for critical distractors is 
compensatory or complementary over the O and NS reality states. In order to do that, we 
took advantage of a corpus of conjoint recognition data that Brainerd et al. (2014) 
assembled. It currently consists of 293 data sets divided into 2 sub-corpora: 169 sets of 
DRM data and 124 sets of data from other standard semantic false memory paradigms. The 
first sub-corpus is derived from experiments in which subjects were exposed to lists drawn 
from the DRM norms (Roediger et al., 2001; Stadler et al., 1999) under a variety of 
conditions that are common in DRM research (e.g., deep vs. shallow encoding, high vs. low 
backward associative strength, auditory vs. visual presentation, fast vs. slow presentation 
rate, younger vs. older subjects). This sub-corpus is further divided into 104 data sets in 
which the NS items were strong (critical distractors) and 65 data sets in which the NS items 
were weak. The second sub-corpus is derived from false memory experiments with tasks 
other than the DRM illusion. The study materials consisted of such things as sentences 
(Singer & Spear, 2015), picture lists (Bookbinder & Brainerd, 2017), lists of unrelated words 
(Odegard & Lampinen, 2005), and short narratives (Brainerd, Reyna, & Estrada, 2006). As 
in DRM experiments, subjects responded to O, NS, and ND items on memory tests, but false 
memory levels are generally lower than in the DRM experiments. Also, these other 
procedures do not as often produce the compelling phenomenological evidence of realty 
reversal that we mentioned in connection with the DRM illusion. Hence, the levels of 
complementarity that are observed with these other procedures are useful benchmarks for 
interpreting the levels that are observed with the DRM procedure.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The feature of conjoint recognition that makes it applicable to complementarity is that 
different groups of subjects respond to different types of memory probes—namely, O?, NS?, 
and O-or-NS? In other words, some subjects respond to “Is it old?” with test items, others 
respond to “Is it new-similar?” and still others respond to “Is it either old or new-similar?” 
Conjoint recognition is a member of a class of procedures that have figured in the memory 
literature for some years. The core feature of those procedures is that subjects are 
administered two types of tests: (a) traditional episodic memory tests (recognition or recall) 
and (b) inferential tests, which require that subjects use episodic memories to make 
judgments that go beyond those memories. Examples of the latter include conditions in 
which subjects make judgments about the theme of a series of events (Abadie, Waroquier, & 
Terrier, 2013), about category membership (Koutstaal, 2003), about spatial relations (Gekens 
& Smith, 2004), about logical implication (Kintsch, Welsch, Schmalhofer, & Zimny, 1990), 
about reversals of meaning (Odegard & Lampinen, 2005), and about pragmatic truth (Singer 
& Remillard, 2008). These procedures have been applied in neuroscience research, where 
the goal is to isolate differences in the brain regions that are active when subjects access 
episodic memories versus when they use them to make various judgments (e.g., Garoff, 
Slotnick, & Schacter, 2005.; Slotnick, 2010). Relative to other members of this class of 
procedures, the distinguishing property of conjoint recognition is that it includes a 
mathematical model that quantifies the retrieval processes that control performance on both 
episodic memory and judgment tests (cf. Equations 1–4). Although that property does not 
figure in Experiment 1, it is exploited later (see General Discussion).
Returning to whether and to what extent memory is compensatory versus complementary, 
this question can be examined with the data of two of the three conjoint recognition 
conditions, by analyzing the values of p(O?) and p(NS?) for both NS and O items. Naturally, 
the values of p(O?) and p(NS?) will vary over these data sets, and we know that such 
variability is predicted as a function of variability in target recollection, context recollection, 
and semantic familiarity (Equations 1–4). The question, as p(O?) and p(NS?) vary over data 
sets, is whether the overall relation between them is compensatory or complementary—for 
critical distractors, weak NS items and O items. That question can be answered by analyzing 
the grand means of p(O?) and p(NS?) for different types of test items, where three patterns 
are possible empirically.
First, performance for a given type of item might square with our intuition and be 
completely compensatory, so that either p(O?) > 0 or p(NS?) > 0, but not both. Logically, 
however, compensation could be either reality-consistent or reality-reversed: It is reality-
consistent when the quantity that is > 0 refers to an item’s correct reality state [p(O?) for O 
items and p(NS?) for NS items], and it is reality-reversed when it refers to the item’s 
incorrect reality state [p(O?) for NS items and p(NS?) for O items]. Note that the latter 
arrangement corresponds to the hypothesis that DRM lists foment reality reversals for 
critical distractors [e.g., p(O?) > 0 and p(NS?) = 0]. The second possible pattern is that 
memory for a given type of item may exhibit partial complementarity, and if so, p(O?) and 
p(NS?) will both be reliability > 0. The exact level of complementarity is determined by the 
spread between the two (the smaller the spread, the greater the complementarity), which is 
conveniently measured by the ratio p(NS?)/[p(O?) + p(NS?)] for NS items and the ratio 
p(O?)/[p(O?) + p(NS?)] for O items. Complementarity becomes stronger as these ratios 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

approach .5. We will say that memory is partially complementary if the (a) p(O?) and 
p(NS?) are both > 0, and (b) either p(O?) > p(NS?) or p(O?) < p(NS?). From the definition 
of the complementarity ratio, partial complementarity is reality-consistent when the ratio is 
> .5, and it is reality-reversed when the ratio is < .5. The third possible pattern is that 
memory for a given type of item may be completely complementary, and if so, p(O?) and 
p(NS?) will both be reliably > 0 and p(O?) = p(NS?), which means that the complementarity 
ratio will be .5. In the two subsections that follow, we investigated levels of complementarity 
displayed by O and NS items in both the DRM and non-DRM sub-corpora.
DRM Sub-corpus
Overall results are shown in Figure 2, where bias-corrected grand means of p(O?) and 
p(NS?) for O and NS items are displayed separately for the strong NS (critical distractor) 
data sets (Panel A) and the weak NS data sets (Panel B). The results in Figure 2 and in the 
remainder of this article are based on the widely used two-high-threshold (2HT) method of 
correcting recognition data for response bias (e.g., Snodgrass and Corwin, 1998). It has been 
suggested that 2HT may occasionally produce different results than some other familiar 
correction methods—in particular, signal detection theory statistics such as d′ and A′ 
(Healy & Kubovy, 1978). Hence, all of the analyses that are reported below and in 
subsequent experiments were repeated using d′ and A′. As none of the results were 
different, we confine attention to the 2HT results in what follows.
Strong NS Data Sets—Taking the critical distractor results first, as expected the values of 
p(O?) and p(NS?) varied widely over data sets, with the ranges being 0–.77 for p(O?) and 
0–.73 for p(NS?). When it came to the relation between them, however, complementarity 
was the clear pattern [i.e., p(O?) ≈ p(NS?) for the grand means]. The main analysis was a 2 
(condition: O? vs. NS? probes) X 2 (item: O vs. NS) analysis of variance (ANOVA). We 
noted earlier that according to Equations 1–4, complementarity should be far more 
pronounced for NS items than for O items. That result would fall out as a Condition X Item 
interaction, such that the difference between the p(O?) and p(NS?) acceptance rates is 
smaller for NS items (and perhaps not reliable) than for O items. A large interaction of this 
sort was the major result, F(1, 102) = 76.10, MSE = .03, ηp2 = .43. It can be seen in Figure 
2A that the interaction was a cross-over such that (a) p(NS?) was larger for NS items than 
for O items, but (b) p(O?) was larger for O items than for NS items. With respect to the 
question of central interest, memory complementarity, post hoc analyses of this interaction 
revealed that memory for NS items was completely complementary, whereas memory for O 
items displayed weak complementary that was reality-consistent; that is, critical distractors 
such as chair and anger were remembered as being old and new-similar as comparable rates, 
whereas list items such as table and mad were remembered as being old at much higher rates 
than they were remembered as being new-similar. The detailed results for those patterns 
follow, but first, we describe the method of analysis because the same two-step analysis will 
be repeated in all of the experiments that are reported in this paper.
Earlier, in the preamble to this experiment, we mentioned that three relations between p(O?) 
and p(NS?) are possible—complete compensation, partial complementarity, or complete 
complementarity. Statistically, the specific relation can be determined in two steps, which 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

consist of one-sample t tests followed by a paired-samples t test. First, the unique feature of 
complete compensation is that either p(O?) or p(NS?) must not be reliably > 0. That can be 
determined by evaluating the null hypotheses that p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-
sample t tests. If one is rejected and the other is not, we stop there and conclude that 
memory was completely compensatory. Otherwise, second, the unique feature of complete 
complementarity is that p(O?) = p(NS?), which can be evaluated with a paired-samples t 
test. When the first step rejects both null hypotheses, the second decides whether 
complementarity is partial (null hypothesis is rejected) or complete. If complementarity is 
partial, whether it is reality-consistent or reality-reversed follows from the direction of the 
difference between p(O?) and p(NS?).
Analyzing the strong NS data first, we tested the null hypotheses that p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) 
= 0 with one-sample t tests, and both were rejected at high levels of confidence, t(103) = 
10.00 and t(103) = 12.26, respectively. (The .05 level of confidence is used for all 
significance tests in this article.) Thus, critical distractors were remembered as belonging to 
each of these incompatible states at reliable levels. Next, we evaluated the null hypothesis 
that p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. That null hypothesis could not be rejected, 
t(103) = .37, indicating complete complementarity between memory for the two reality 
states. Consistent with that, the complementarity ratio p(NS?)/[p(O?) + p(NS?)] = .49. In 
this pool of data sets, then, rather than inducing a reality reversal in which strong NS items 
were erroneously perceived to be O and not NS, on average these items were erroneously 
perceived to be O on O? tests and correctly perceived to be NS on NS? tests at comparable 
levels.
Turning to O items, one-sample t tests rejected the null hypotheses that p(O?) = 0, t(103) = 
17.16, and p(NS?) = 0, t(103) = 2.14. We then evaluated the null hypothesis that p(O?) = 
p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. That null hypothesis was rejected at a high level of 
confidence, t(103) = 15.08, and the complementarity ratio p(O?)/[p(O?) + p(NS?)] = .76. 
Hence, DRM lists also induced a moderate degree of complementarity for list items, which 
was reality-consistent because the complementarity ratio was > .5.
In sum, subjects correctly remembered the traditional critical distractors of DRM lists as 
being new-similar at approximately the same rate as they erroneously remembered them as 
being old. Thus, over the conditions of this sub-corpus, DRM lists did not foment a reality 
reversal but, instead, did something more novel. They stimulated a complementarity illusion 
in which memory for these items was mapped with each of these incompatible states at 
similar levels. As predicted on theoretical grounds, this illusion was not observed for list 
words, which displayed a moderate level of reality-consistent complementarity.
Weak NS Data Sets—Turning to the weak NS portion of the sub-corpus, the pattern was 
somewhat different for weak than for strong NS items but was the same for O items (Figure 
2B). As with the strong NS data sets, the values of p(O?) and p(NS?) varied widely over the 
weak NS data sets, with the ranges being 0–.43 for p(O?) and 0–.55 for p(NS?). When it 
came to the relation between them, however, partial complementarity that was reality 
consistent was the clear pattern [i.e., p(O?) > 0, p(NS?) > 0, and p(O?) < p(NS?)]. As before, 
the main analysis was a 2 (condition: O? vs. NS? probes) X 2 (item: O vs. NS) ANOVA. 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Also as before, the main result was a large Condition X Item cross-over interaction, F(1, 65) 
= 83.11, MSE = .03, ηp2 = .56. Post hoc analysis of this interaction produced results that 
were similar to those reported above, except that the level of complementarity for weak NS 
items was slightly less marked than it was for strong NS items.
For weak NS items, we first tested the null hypotheses that p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with 
one-sample t tests, and both were rejected at high levels of confidence, t(65) = 10.34 and 
t(65) = 10.45, respectively. Thus, memory displayed complementarity for weak NS items, 
but unlike critical distractors, it was imperfect because when we tested the null hypothesis 
that p(O?) = p(NS?), it was rejected. However, consider the values of p(O?) and p(NS?) in 
Figure 2B (.14 and .19). With those values, the complementarity ratio was .58, which is 
obviously close to .5, even though it is reliably larger. Further, notice that the direction of the 
difference is reality-consistent, which means that there is no sense in which DRM lists 
induced reality reversals for either strong or weak NS items. The bottom line is that like 
critical distractors, weak NS items displayed marked complementarity because the 
complementarity ratios was close to .5, and the hit rate on NS? probes was slightly but 
reliably higher than the false alarm rate on O? probes.
With respect to O items, one-sample t tests rejected the null hypothesis that p(O?) = 0, t(65) 
= 15.67, and the null hypothesis that p(NS?) = 0, t(65) = 8.06. We then evaluated the null 
hypothesis that p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-sample t test. That null hypothesis was 
rejected at a high level of confidence, t(65) = 12.66. As in the strong NS data sets, then, 
DRM lists fomented only moderate complementarity for list items because the 
complementarity ratio was .79, which is close to its value for the strong NS data sets (.76).
Non-DRM Sub-corpus
Turning to the non-DRM sub-corpus, the hallmark of these tasks is that they generate lower 
average levels of false memory (judging NS items to be O) than DRM critical distractors. 
Referring to Equations 1 and 2, the two changes, relative to the DRM sub-corpus, that would 
have the largest suppressive effect on false memory would be increases in target recollection, 
which would decrease O? acceptances and increase NS? acceptances, and decreases in 
context recollection, which would have the same two consequences. Considering that 
memory for critical distractors was found to be completely complementary, the outcome of 
either change would be to reduce complementarity in a reality-consistent direction. This 
could only fail to happen if both R and P decreased in such a way that the paired values fall 
on the curve in Figure 1 [i.e., the values satisfy P = R/(1−R)]. For purely statistical reasons, 
it is improbable that the data would always arrange themselves in just that way over a wide 
assortment of conditions, and hence, the straightforward prediction is that NS items in the 
non-DRM sub-corpus should exhibit lower levels of complementarity, as well as lower 
levels of false memory.
Bias-corrected grand means for the non-DRM sub-corpus are displayed in Figure 3 for the 
O? and NS? conditions. First, we conducted the same 2 (condition: O? vs. NS? probes) X 2 
(item: O vs. NS) ANOVA of the p(O?) and p(NS?) means for the various conditions in this 
sub-corpus. As in the ANOVAs of the DRM sub-corpus, there was a large Condition X Item 
crossover interaction, F(1, 123) = 386.16, MSE = .03, ηp2 = .66. Post hoc analysis of this 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

interaction produced more modest complementarity for both list items and NS items than the 
DRM sub-corpus did.
Analyzing the NS data for complementarity first, the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0, p(NS?) = 0, 
and p(O?) = p(NS?), were all rejected high levels of confidence, ts(123) = 11.08, 20.40, and 
6.84, respectively. Note in Figure 3 that the mean of p(O?) for NS items was not only well 
above 0 (.16), but there was a sizeable difference between that value and the mean of p(NS?) 
for these items (.28) in the reality-consistent direction. That difference (.12) is far larger than 
the differences for strong and weak NS items in the DRM illusion—producing a 
complementarity ratio of .67, which is noticeably closer to 1 than the ratios for strong and 
weak NS items in the DRM sub-corpus (.49 and .58, respectively). Another important point 
is that over the DRM and non-DRM sub-corpora, complementarity for NS items does seem 
to be simply a monotonic function of the level of false memory level: The level of false 
memory for NS items in the non-DRM sub-corpus [i.e., p(O?) for such items] was roughly 
the same as for weak NS items in the DRM sub-corpus (.16 vs. .14), but the level of 
complementarity was more moderate.
With respect to O items, complementarity was weaker than for NS items, as Equations 1–4 
predict. First, a one-sample t test showed that the null hypothesis that p(O?) = 0 could be 
rejected, t(123) = 29.23, and although the value of p(NS?) in Figure 3 is very close to 0 (.
05), a one-sample t test showed that the null hypothesis that p(NS?) = 0 could also be 
rejected, t(123) = 4.02. Naturally, the large difference between p(O?) and p(NS?) in Figure 3 
(.49) meant that the p(O?) = p(NS?) null hypothesis was rejected by a paired-samples t test, 
t(123) = 22.98. With the values of p(O?) and p(NS?) in Figure 3, the complementarity ratio 
(.91) approaches perfect compensation, although it is reliably < 1.
The most instructive finding is that the non-DRM result buttress the stature of the DRM 
paradigm as a unique procedure that induces especially high levels of complementarity for 
NS items. Regardless of whether one compares the results for strong or weak NS items in 
the DRM sub-corpus to the result for NS items in the non-DRM sub-corpus, 
complementarity is much more robust for the DRM paradigm and is complete for critical 
distractors.
Experiments 2 and 3
Experiment 1 was a study of convenience inasmuch as it relied on an existing corpus that 
happened to include the complementary O? and NS? conditions, in order to gain leverage on 
the type of illusion that DRM lists induce. The next two experiments were designed to 
generate new data on this question, using procedures that are familiar in the literature—
except for the fact that the O and NS reality states were both tested within-rather than 
between-subjects, for all items. In each experiment, subjects were exposed to a large number 
of DRM lists that produce the highest levels of false recognition of critical distractors in 
extant norms, followed by O? and NS? tests for O, strong NS, weak NS, and ND items.
The difference between the two experiments was the presence of delayed tests in the second 
one. The design of Experiment 2 simply exposed subjects to DRM lists, followed by O? and 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

NS? probes for the four types of items. However, an often-discussed feature of the DRM 
illusion is its stability over time, with reliable levels of distortion being detectable a day, a 
week, or a month after list presentation (Payne, Elie, Blackwell, & Neuschatz, 1996; Toglia, 
Neuschatz, & Goodwin, 1999). Clearly, it is important to know whether complementarity is 
similarly stable and whether the complementarity ordering of strong NS > weak NS > O is 
also stable. Those questions were investigated in Experiment 3 by adding delayed tests to the 
design of Experiment 2. Several DRM lists were again presented, followed by O? and NS? 
probes for half of these lists. One to two weeks later, O? and NS? probes were administered 
for all of the lists. By comparing delayed performance for lists that were tested versus were 
not tested a week earlier, we were able to determine how prior testing affects the stability of 
complementarity.
Another notable feature of Experiments 2 and 3 is that O? and NS? probes were varied 
within-subject. In conjoint recognition experiments, the normal procedure is for different 
groups of subjects to participate in the different testing conditions, and that procedure 
figured in nearly all of the data sets there were analyzed in Experiment 1. Therefore, at this 
point, the evidence that DRM lists induce complementarity illusions is restricted to between-
subject comparisons of O? and NS? performance. That is a significant limitation because the 
false memory literature contains examples of variables that produce robust effects with 
between-subject comparisons but no effect or small effects with within-subject comparisons. 
In order to address this uncertainty, all subjects in Experiments 2 and 3 responded to 
recognition probes for all four types of items that were half O? and half NS?
Method
Subjects—The subjects in Experiment 2 were 114 undergraduates, who participated to 
fulfill a course requirement. The subjects in Experiment 2 were 168 undergraduates, who 
participated to fulfill a course requirement. The research protocol for these two experiments 
and for Experiments 4, 5, and 6 was approved by the local Institutional Review Board and 
was in compliance with the ethical standards of the American Psychological Association.
Materials—The materials came from a pool of DRM lists that had been drawn from the 
Stadler et al. (1999) norms, which report levels of true and false recognition for 36 lists. 
Each list consists of the first 15 forward associates of a missing word, the critical distractor 
(cf. Table 1). For each subject, we randomly selected 16 of these lists for presentation. Those 
lists supplied the items that were presented during the study phase of each experiment, and 
they supplied the O, strong NS, and weak NS items that were subjected to immediate and 
delayed memory tests. The remaining 20 lists in the norms supplied the ND items for 
immediate and delayed tests.
Procedure—The procedure for Experiment 2 consisted of two steps, list presentation 
followed by immediate memory tests. The procedure for Experiment 3 consisted of three 
steps, list presentation, followed by immediate memory tests, followed by delayed memory 
tests. At the start of Experiment 2, subjects received general memory instructions that 
described the overall structure of the experiment. Next, the 16 DRM lists were presented in 
random order via prerecorded audio files, as the subject sat at a computer to which 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

headphones were attached. The individual words on each list were presented in descending 
order of forward associative strength, as is traditional in DRM research. In order to make the 
subjects’ memory task manageable, the first eight words of each DRM list were presented in 
Experiment 2. At the start of list presentation, the subject was told that he or she would be 
listening to 16 short word lists and that a memory test would be administered after all the 
lists had been presented. Next, list presentation began with the announcement “first list,” 
followed by the words of the first DRM list being read at a 3 sec rate. There was a 10 sec 
pause after the last word of the first list, at the end of which the subject heard “next list,” 
followed by the words of the next list, presented at a 3sec rate. This procedure of presenting 
a list, followed by a 10 sec pause, followed by the next list was continued until all 16 lists 
had been presented.
Following list presentation, the subject read instructions that described the upcoming 
memory test and provided concrete examples. The instructions explained that the test would 
consist of words that they had just heard on the lists (O), new words that were semantically 
similar to list words (NS), and new words that were unrelated to list words (ND). Examples 
of each type of word were provided. The instructions also informed subjects that they would 
make one of two types of judgments about individual test words. They were told that for half 
the words, they would be asked whether the words were old list words, whereas for the other 
half, they would be asked if the words were new-similar. Further examples were provided of 
correct and incorrect judgments of both types, and they were accompanied by a series of O? 
and NS? practice probes. Correct answers were provided for the practice probes, and the 
subject was encouraged to ask any questions about the nature of the upcoming test.
The subject then responded to a 144-item self-paced memory test for the 16 DRM lists, with 
the test items administered in random order. The test items were of four types: (a) 48 O 
words (3 from each presented list); (b) 16 strong NS words (the critical distractors for the 
presented lists); (c) 32 weak NS words (two unpresented words from each presented list, 
drawn at random from positions 9–15); and (d) 48 ND words. Concerning the ND words, 
they were further subdivided into 16 words that were the critical distractors for 16 of the 
unpresented DRM lists in the Stadler et al. (1999) norms, and 32 words that were targets 
from those same unpresented lists (2 per list, selected at random). On this test, subjects 
responded to O? probes for half the words in each of the four groups of words, and they 
responded to NS? probes for the other half of the words in each group.
The design of Experiment 3 was the same as that of Experiment 2, except for (a) the content 
of the memory test that followed the presentation of the 16 lists and (b) the addition of a 
delayed memory test. Concerning a, the initial memory test that followed presentation of this 
lists was a self-paced recognition test that consisted of 72 items, rather than 144, because 
only 8 of the 16 DRM lists were tested. Thus, the test consisted of the following types of 
items: 24 O words (3 from each of 8 presented lists, selected at random); 8 strong NS words 
(the critical distractors for the 8 tested lists); 16 weak NS items (2 unpresented words from 
each of the 8 tested lists, drawn at random from positions 9–15); 24 ND items (the 8 critical 
distractors from 8 unpresented DRM lists, plus 2 list words from each of those lists). 
Following this initial test, subjects were scheduled to return to the laboratory for a delayed 
test at intervals of 7–14 days. Overall, the mean length of time between the immediate and 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

delayed tests for these subjects was 10 days. The content of the delayed test was identical to 
the immediate test in Experiment 2; that is, all 16 presented lists were tested, the 8 that had 
been tested on the immediate test and the 8 that had not been.
Experiment 2—In Figure 4A, we display the bias-corrected acceptance probabilities in the 
O? and NS? conditions for strong NS, weak NS, and O items. Visually, it is apparent that the 
same complementarity pattern that was detected in the conjoint recognition corpus was also 
present in this experiment. For strong NS items, it can be seen that the probability of judging 
them to be old list items was virtually the same as the probability of judging them to be new-
similar. Complementarity was less marked for weak NS items and was reality-consistent. 
Subjects were less likely to incorrectly judge weak NS items to be old than to correctly 
judge them to be new-similar. Complementarity was even more moderate and reality-
consistent for O items subjects were far more likely to correctly judge them to be old than to 
incorrectly judge them to be new-similar. The corresponding complementarity ratios are .
43, .66, and .80 for strong NS, weak NS, and O items, respectively, and hence, 
complementarity was robust for strong NS items, moderate for weak NS items, and modest 
for O items.
The main statistical analysis was a 2 (condition: O? vs. NS? probes) X 3 (item: strong NS 
vs. weak NS vs. O) ANOVA of the bias-corrected means of p(O?) and p(NS?) for the three 
types of items. The key result, as in the conjoint recognition corpus, was a large Condition X 
Item interaction, F(1, 224) = 25.88, MSE = .09, ηp2 = .19. The reason for the interaction is 
the variation in complementarity is apparent in the above ratios.
The detailed complementarity analyses produced the following patterns for the three types of 
items. First, for strong NS items, we tested the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 
with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. 
The first two hypotheses were rejected at high levels of confidence, t(112) = 10.50 and 
t(112) = 9.07, respectively, but the third null hypothesis could not be rejected, t(112) = 1.01. 
Statistically, then, memory for strong NS items was completely complementary, although 
numerically, the complementary ratio was < .5. Second, for weak NS items, we also tested 
the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis 
p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. Similar to strong NS items, the first two 
hypotheses were rejected at high levels of confidence, t(112) = 5.73 and t(112) = 8.22, 
respectively, but unlike strong NS items, the third null hypothesis was also rejected, t(112) = 
2.96. Thus, memory for weak NS items was complementary [because p(O?) and p(NS?) 
were both reliably > 0] and moderately so [because p(NS?) was reliably > than p(O?)]. 
Third, for O items, we again tested the null hypotheses that p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with 
one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis that p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. 
Similar to both types of NS items, the first two hypotheses were rejected at high levels of 
confidence, t(112) = 11.49 and t(112) = 2.77, respectively, and similar to weak NS items, the 
third null hypothesis was also rejected, t(112) = 8.94. Hence, the pattern for both O items 
was only weak complementarity, considering that the complementarity ratio was closer to 1 
than to .5.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Summing up, in this experiment we measured complementary within-subjects by 
administering both O? and NS? probes to them. However, the overriding conclusions that 
emerged were the same as when complementarity was measured between-subjects 
(Experiment 1). First, there was no evidence that DRM lists induce reality reversals, in 
which critical distractors are remembered as being what they are not (old) and not as what 
they are (new-similar). Second, there was consistent evidence that DRM lists induce 
complementarity illusions for NS items and that the overall complementarity ordering is 
strong NS > weak NS > O.
Finally, notice an interesting asymmetry between O? and NS? probes that is relevant to a 
previously mentioned finding about the DRM illusion—namely, that levels of true and false 
recognition often do not differ. The asymmetry is that this finding depends on which reality 
state subjects were responding to. With O? probes, the standard result was obtained; 
acceptance probabilities for O and strong NS items were virtually the same (Figure 3A). In 
contrast, with NS? probes, the level of true memory (acceptance of NS items) was two times 
the level of false memory (acceptance of O items).
Experiment 3—Complementarity was measured on two occasions in this experiment, 
immediately after list presentation and 10 days later. We report the results for the immediate 
test first, followed by the results for the delayed test.
Immediate test: The bias-corrected acceptance probabilities in the O? and NS? conditions 
are displayed in Figure 3B for the three types of test items. Obviously, the complementarity 
picture is broadly the same as in Experiments 1 and 2. For strong NS items, the probability 
of judging them to be old list items was virtually the same as the probability of judging them 
to be new-similar. Complementarity was also evident for weak NS items but was less 
marked and was only weakly present for O items. For weak NS items, subjects were 
somewhat less likely to incorrectly judge them to be old than to correctly judge them to be 
new-similar, and for O words, subjects were far more likely to correctly judge them to be old 
than to incorrectly judge them to be new-similar. The corresponding complementarity ratios 
were .49, .59, and .86 for strong NS, weak NS, and O items, respectively. Thus, 
complementarity was complete for strong NS items, quite robust for weak NS items, and 
very weak for O items. Note that the ratios for weak NS and O items are both reality-
consistent.
As in Experiment 2, the main statistical analysis was a 2 (condition: O? vs. NS? probes) X 3 
(item: O vs. strong NS vs. weak NS) ANOVA of the bias-corrected means of p(O?) and 
p(NS?) for the three types of items. Also as in Experiment 2, the key result was a large 
Condition X Item interaction, F(1, 334) = 49.69, MSE = .08, ηp2 = .23. The reason for the 
interaction is that as the just-mentioned complementarity pattern indicates, the spread 
between p(O?) and p(NS?) varied considerably as a function of which type of item was 
being tested.
We repeated the same detailed analyses of complementarity effects for the three types of 
items. For strong NS items, we tested the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with 
one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. The 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

first two hypotheses were rejected at high levels of confidence, t(168) = 14.50 and t(168) = 
14.42, respectively, but the third could not be rejected, t(167) = .42. Once again, then, 
memory for critical distractors was completely complementary. Next, for weak NS items, we 
also tested the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null 
hypothesis p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. Similar to strong NS items, the first 
two hypotheses were rejected, t(168) = 7.13 and t(168) = 11.94, respectively, but unlike 
strong NS items, the third null hypothesis was also rejected, t(167) = 2.79. Thus, memory 
for weak NS items was partially complementary but was strongly so because the 
complementarity ratio (.59) approached .5. Last, for O items, we again tested the null 
hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) 
= p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. Similar to weak NS items, the first two hypotheses 
were rejected, t(168) = 22.76 and t(168) = 3.49, respectively, and the third null hypothesis 
was also rejected, t(167) = 13.18. Therefore, memory for O was also partially 
complementary, and only very weakly so because the complementarity ratio (.86) was far 
from .5. Finally, the complementarity ordering was again strong NS > weak NS > O.
Note in Figure 3B that the data of the immediate test exhibited the same asymmetry between 
O? and NS? probes that was present in Experiment 2. On the one hand, the standard finding 
that true and false recognition levels are virtually the same for O and strong NS items, 
respectively, was again obtained with O? probes. With NS? probes, on the other hand, the 
true recognition level was much higher than the false recognition level.
Delayed test: Recall that these subjects received a delayed test whose content was identical 
to the immediate test in Experiment 2; that is, all 16 DRM lists were tested, whereas only 8 
had been tested on the immediate test. This means that there was an additional design factor 
for the delayed test: Half of the items in each of the four categories (O, strong NS, weak NS, 
ND) had been previously tested, and the other half were tested for the first time. A well-
known finding about how prior testing affects performance on delayed tests is that it helps 
preserve both verbatim and gist traces of study materials, elevating both true and false 
memory on subsequent tests (for a review, see Brainerd & Poole, 1995). Because, as we saw, 
complementarity depends on the mix of gist and verbatim processing, we measured it 
separately for previously tested versus previous untested items.
The bias-corrected acceptance probabilities in the O? and NS? conditions are displayed in 
Figure 4A for previously tested items and in Figure 4B for previously untested items. Taking 
previously tested items first, the complementarity picture is qualitatively the same as on the 
immediate test for strong NS items (complete complementarity) and O items (partial 
complementarity) but is different for weak NS items. Although it is still the case that 
memory for weak NS items was partially complementary, the complementarity ratio was in 
the reality-reversed direction, whereas it was reality-consistent in Experiment 1 and on the 
immediate tests of Experiments 2 and 3. The relevant complementarity ratios are .53, .29, 
and .63 for strong NS, weak NS, and O items, respectively. Turning to the previously 
untested items, the qualitative picture was the same for strong and weak NS items but 
different for O items. Complementarity was complete for strong NS items and partial but 
reality-reversed for weak NS items, whereas memory was completely compensatory and 
reality-consistent for O items. The relevant complementarity ratios are .46, .30, and .91 for 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

strong NS, weak NS, and O items, respectively, and the O ratio was not reliably < 1 (see 
below).
The main statistical analysis was a 2 (prior testing: tested vs. untested) X 2 (condition: O? 
vs. NS? probes) X 3 (item: O vs. strong NS vs. weak NS) ANOVA of the bias-corrected 
means of p(O?) and p(NS?) for the three types of items. As in all prior ANOVAs, there as a 
large Condition X Item interaction, F(2, 304) = 14.32, MSE = .06, ηp2 = .09. Also as in prior 
ANOVAs, the reason for this interaction is that the spread between p(O?) and p(NS?) varied 
as a function of the type of item that was being tested. This ANOVA contained a new factor, 
prior testing, that was not present in previous ANOVAs, which produced an important but 
anticipated finding: There was a large main effect for this factor, F(1, 304) = 48.69, MSE = .
11, ηp2 = .24, which was due to the fact that the grand means of p(O?) and p(NS?) were 
larger for previously tested items than for previously untested items. We report the detailed 
analyses of complementarity effects separately for previously tested and previously untested 
items.
Taking previously tested items first, for strong NS items, we tested the null hypotheses p(O?) 
= 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) = p(NS?) with a 
paired-samples t test. The first two hypotheses were rejected, t(1152) = 7.06 and t(152) = 
8.32, respectively, but the third null hypothesis could not be rejected, t(167) = .73. As in all 
prior analyses, then, memory for previously tested strong NS items was completely 
complementary. For weak NS items, we also tested the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and 
p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-
samples t test. Similar to strong NS items, the first two hypotheses were rejected, t(152) = 
8.89 and t(152) = 3.40, respectively, but the third null hypothesis was also rejected, t(152) = 
3.78. Hence, memory for weak NS items was partially complementary, and it was also 
reality-reversed because p(O?) > p(NS?). Finally, for O items, we tested the null hypotheses 
that p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis that p(O?) = 
p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. Similar to weak NS items, the first and second 
hypotheses were rejected, t(152) = 12.01 and t(152) = 5.98, respectively, and the third was 
also rejected, t(152) = 3.36. Therefore, memory for O items was also partially 
complementary, but it was reality-consistent because p(O?) > p(NS?).
Continuing with previously untested items, the complementarity results for NS items were 
similar to those for their previously untested counterparts, but they were different for O 
items. For strong NS items, we tested the null hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with 
one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) = p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. The 
first two hypotheses were rejected, t(1152) = 5.41 and t(152) = 3.97, respectively, but the 
third could not be rejected, t(167) = .78. As in all prior analyses, then, memory for strong 
NS items was completely complementary. For weak NS items, we also tested the null 
hypotheses p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 with one-sample t tests and the null hypothesis p(O?) 
= p(NS?) with a paired-samples t test. Similar to strong NS items, the first two hypotheses 
were rejected, t(152) = 8.77 and t(152) = 3.83, respectively, but the third null hypothesis was 
also rejected, t(152) = 9.54. Hence, memory for weak NS items was partially 
complementary, and the direction of the difference between p(O?) and p(NS?) was reality-
reversed. Finally, for O items, we tested the null hypotheses that p(O?) = 0 and p(NS?) = 0 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with one-sample t tests. The first hypothesis was rejected, t(152) = 7.31, but the second 
hypothesis was not, t(152) = .88. Thus, memory was completely compensatory and reality-
consistent for O items. This is the only instance in any of our DRM experiments in which 
memory was not at least weakly complementary.
Summary—These experiments generated a large amount of additional data on the question 
of whether DRM lists induce a reality reversal or a complementarity illusion. Consistent 
with Experiment 1, performance was completely complementary for critical distractors. This 
pattern held for delayed as well as immediate tests. Also as in Experiment 1, the 
complementarity effect generalized to weak NS items, with complementarity being partial 
rather than complete in both instances. Pooling over all of the conditions in the Experiments 
2 and 3, the complementarity ordering was strong NS > weak NS > O, as it was in 
Experiment 1. Recall that the fact that complementarity is always more marked for new-
similar items than for list items is a prediction of the conjoint recognition model.
Relative to Experiment 1 and the immediate tests of Experiments 2 and 3, there was one 
difference in the detailed results for the delayed tests in Experiment 3. For both previously 
tested and previously untested weak NS items, the partial complementarity pattern was 
reality-reversed, whereas it was reality-consistent in all earlier comparisons. Statistically 
speaking, on delayed tests weak NS items were remembered as being both NS and O, but 
they were remembered as being O at higher rates (the mean value of the complementarity 
ratio was .30). Ironically, then, although there was no evidence of reality reversals for critical 
distractors in any of our data, there was some slight evidence of it, under special testing 
conditions, for a type of new-similar item that is not tested in most DRM experiments.
Experiment 4
The data up to this point show that under standard conditions, DRM lists induce 
complementarity illusions rather than reality reversals. Considering that strong NS items, 
weak NS items, and O items exhibited complementarity in a graded fashion that is congruent 
with theoretical expectations, it is time to move on to the question of whether the levels of 
complementarity that critical distractors display can be altered with manipulations that are 
motivated by the same theoretical distinctions. In particular, is it possible to shift memory 
for critical distractors away from complete complementarity toward partial complementarity 
that is both reality-reversed and reality-consistent?
Before taking up that question, however, we briefly report a housekeeping experiment that 
dealt with a pair of residual questions. The bulk of contemporary DRM experiments focus 
on recognition rather than recall, but several recall experiments have been reported, too (e.g., 
Howe, Candel, Otgaar, Malone, & Wimmer, 2010; Toglia et al., 1999). Although most 
manipulations have similar effects when the DRM illusion is measured with recognition or 
recall, a few have different effects (e.g., Howe et al., 2010). Also, false memory levels are 
lower with recall than with recognition (cf. Roediger et al., 2001; Stadler et al., 1999), 
suggesting that the mix of verbatim and gist retrieval is different (Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). 
Thus, it is natural to wonder whether the pattern of strong complementarity for critical 
distractors will be observed with recall as well as recognition.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To answer that question, we conducted a standard type of experiment (e.g.., Payne et al., 
1996) in which subjects studied a series of DRM lists that were presented in small blocks 
and recalled the lists in each block after presentation. The subjects were 60 undergraduates 
who participated to fulfill a course requirement, with each subject being randomly assigned 
to one of two recall conditions: O? or NS? Each subject studied 12 15-word DRM lists that 
were randomly selected from the 36 lists in the Stadler et al. (1999) norms. The procedure 
was the same for each subject. First, the subject received general memory instructions, 
which stated that he/she would listen to several short lists of words presented in three groups 
and would be given a memory test after each group of lists. Next, the subject listened to 
audio files of four lists, with each being read in the traditional “forward” order (strongest-to-
weakest forward associates of the critical distractor), at a rate of 2.5 sec per word and with a 
10 sec pause between consecutive lists. Before list presentation began, the subject was told 
to focus on each word as it was presented and to avoid thinking of other words. Following 
the first block of lists, subjects solved arithmetic problems for 1 min, read instructions for 
the recall test, and then performed 3 min of written free recall. The instructions for the O? 
condition told subjects to recall only words from the lists that had just been presented and to 
avoid recalling unpresented words with similar meanings, whereas the instructions for the 
NS? condition told subjects to recall only unpresented words that were similar in meaning to 
list words and to avoid recalling words that actually been presented. The instructions 
provided examples of the types of words that should and should not be recalled. The 
procedure was the same for the second and third blocks. No lists were repeated over blocks.
The results were simple—namely, complete complementarity for critical distractors and 
weak complementarity that was reality-consistent for list words. On the one hand, critical 
distractors were recalled at virtually that same rate in the two conditions: p(O?) = .29 and 
p(NS?) = .28, for a complementarity ratio of .49. On the other hand, list words were recalled 
at much higher levels in the O? condition than in the NS? condition: p(O?) = .40 and p(NS?) 
= .07, for a complementarity ratio of .85. In short recall, was completely complementary 
over the O and NS reality states for critical distractors and was only weakly so for list words.
We conducted a follow-up analysis to determine whether complementarity varied as a 
function of the strength of the DRM illusion. Normed levels of false recall vary widely for 
the Stadler et al. (1999) lists, ranging from a high of p(O?) = .65 (window) to a low of p(O?) 
= .10 (king), with a grand mean of .46. Although complete complementarity for critical 
distractors was observed for the list pool as a whole, it is natural to wonder whether it varies 
as a function of level of false memory. An intuitive hypothesis is that complementarity might 
be weaker and reality-reversed for lists that produce higher levels of false recall. To evaluate 
that, we spilt the list pool into the 18 lists with the highest levels of false recall (Mp(O?) = .
51) and the 18 lists with the lowest levels of false recall (Mp(O?) = .29), we computed the 
mean complementarity ratios for critical distractors and list words separately for each group.
Taking critical distractors first, there was some weak evidence that complementarity is 
influenced by baseline levels of false recall. For critical distractors, the complementarity 
ratios were .45 and .56 for high and low lists, respectively. Neither of these ratios differed 
reliably from .5, and thus, complementarity was complete, regardless of baseline level of 
false memory. On the other hand, the complementarity ratio for low lists was reliably larger, 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

and therefore more reality-consistent, than the ratio for high lists. For targets, there was no 
evidence that complementarity is influenced by baseline levels of false recall. The 
complementarity ratios were .87 and .83 for high and low lists, respectively. Both values 
were reliably larger than .5 but did not differ reliably from each other. Thus, the weak and 
reality-consistent complementarity that was observed for the list pool as a whole was also 
observed for the high and low halves of the pool.
Experiment 5
In this experiment and in Experiment 6, we take up the question of whether and how the 
complementarity illusion can be controlled by theoretically-motivated manipulations. 
According to Equations 1 and 2, the most direct way to decrease the level of 
complementarity that critical distractors exhibit (i.e., move the complementarity ratio away 
from .5) in either a reality-consistent or a reality-reversed direction is to drive target 
recollection (parameter R) up or down, respectively, relative to a baseline condition that 
exhibits strong complementarity. Here, remember that the relevant expressions are pNS(O?) 
= (1−R)P + (1−R)(1− P)SNS and pNS(NS?) = R + (1− R)(1− P)SNS. Suppose that these 
expressions refer to a baseline condition in which critical distractors display strong 
complementarity, and some manipulation A is introduced that increases R without affecting 
other processes. Obviously, pNS(NS?) will increase and pNS(O?) will decrease because the R 
term increases in the pNS(NS?) expression, while the (1− R)P term decreases in the pNS(O?) 
expression. The net effect is to decrease complementarity in the reality-consistent direction 
by forcing the complementarity ratio toward 1. On the other hand, suppose that some 
manipulation B is introduced that decreases R without affecting other processes, relative to 
the same baseline condition. Now, pNS(O?) will increase and pNS(NS?) will decrease 
because the (1−R)P term increases in the pNS(O?) expression, while the R term decreases in 
the pNS(NS?) expression. The net effect of manipulation B is to decrease complementarity in 
the reality-reversed direction by driving the complementarity ratio toward 0.
In Experiment 5, we investigated a familiar manipulation that ought to decrease 
complementarity by increasing target recollection, whereas in Experiment 6, we investigated 
another familiar manipulation that ought to decrease complementarity by decreasing target 
recollection. The manipulation in Experiment 5 was list repetition, which has often been 
shown not only to increase hit rates but to increase vivid recollection of list words, using 
indexes such as R judgments in the remember-know procedure and confidence ratings (for a 
review, see Yonelinas, 2002). Thus, repetition should increase the R parameter. We 
replicated the immediate phase of Experiment 3, with the addition of a repetition condition: 
For control subjects, the procedure was identical to Experiment 3, but for subjects in the 
repetition group, each DRM list was presented twice.
Method
Subjects—The subjects were 60 undergraduates, who participated to fulfill a course 
requirement. Half the subjects were randomly assigned to the control and repetition 
conditions, respectively.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Materials and Procedure—For the control group, the materials and procedures were 
identical to the immediate-testing phase of Experiment 3: Subjects listened to audio files of 
16 DRM lists that had been randomly sampled from the Stadler et al. (1999) norms, 
followed by a recognition test for 8 randomly selected lists on which half the probes were 
O? and half were NS?. The test items were O, strong NS, and weak NS items for the eight 
lists, plus ND items. For the repetition group, the procedure was the same, except for one 
change—namely, that subjects listened to the audio file for each of eight DRM lists twice. 
Thus, the subjects in both groups listened to a total of 16 audio files of DRM lists. However, 
8 randomly selected DRM lists were each presented twice in the repetition condition, 
whereas 16 randomly selected RM lists were each presented once in the control condition. 
As in Experiment 3, the order of list presentation was random, but in the repetition 
condition, it was subject to the constraint that the two presentations of a given DRM list 
were never consecutive.
In Figure 6, we display the bias-corrected acceptance probabilities for O? and NS? probes 
for strong NS, weak NS, and O items. The data for the control condition (Panel A) parallel 
the findings of the immediate testing conditions of Experiments 2 and 3 in that strong NS 
items displayed complete complementarity. However, so did weak NS items. O items 
displayed reality-consistent partial complementarity [i.e., p(O?) > p(NS?)]. The results for 
the repetition condition were quite different (Figure 6B). First, strong NS items now 
displayed only partial complementarity, which was reality-consistent [i.e., p(NS?) > p(O?), 
with a complementarity ratio of .62]. Second, weak NS items and O items displayed only 
moderate, reality-consistent complementarity that was roughly equivalent (complementarity 
ratios of .72 and .77, respectively). In short, as expected on theoretical grounds, a 
manipulation that should increase target recollection, produced across-the-board reductions 
in complementarity by increasing reality-consistent memory, as measured by p(NS?) for 
new-similar items and by p(O?) for list items, and decreasing reality-reversed memory, as 
measured by p(O?) for new-similar items and by p(NS?) for list items.
The main statistical analysis was a 2 (repetition: control vs. repetition) X 2 (condition: O? 
vs. NS? probes) X 3 (item: strong NS vs. weak NS vs. O) ANOVA of the bias-corrected 
means of p(O?) and p(NS?) for the three types of items. There were two key results—
namely, a Condition X Item interaction, F(2, 116) = 25.17, MSE = .05, ηp2 = .30 and a 
Repetition X Condition X Item interaction, F(2, 116) = 6.06, MSE = .05, ηp2 = .11. The 
reason for the Condition X Item interaction is that the order of overall acceptance 
probabilities for the three types of items was different for O? probes versus NS? probes. Post 
hoc tests showed that the order was O > strong NS > weak NS for O? probes, but was strong 
NS > weak NS = O for NS? probes. The reason for the Repetition X Condition X Item 
interaction is that although these two orderings were the same in the control and repetition 
conditions, for O? probes the differences between the acceptance probabilities for the three 
probes were greater in the repetition condition.
The important consequence of the latter result is the manner in which repetition affected the 
complementarity ratios for the three types of items. As mentioned, repetition’s overall effect 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 24
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

was to drive all of the complementarity ratios toward 1. In the control condition, the ratios 
for O, strong NS, and weak NS items were .71, .52, and .61, respectively. The O ratio was 
reliably different from .5 [i.e., p(O?) > p(NS?); t(29) = 3.05], but the two NS ratios were not. 
In the repetition condition, the corresponding ratios for O, strong NS, and weak NS items 
were .71, .63, and .87, respectively. The O ratio was reliably different from .5 [i.e., p(O?) > 
p(NS?); t(29) = 6.64] and so were the strong NS ratio [i.e., p(NS?) > p(O?); t(29) = 2.05] 
and the weak NS ratio [i.e., p(NS?) > p(O?); t(29) = 3.79].
In short, the overall picture is that a manipulation that ought to increase target recollection 
by enhancing retrieval of verbatim traces of list words affected complementarity across-the-
board and by driving the complementarity ratios for strong and weak NS items in the reality-
consistent direction. In most conditions of prior experiments and in the control condition of 
this experiment, critical distractors have shown complete complementarity. In the present 
repetition condition, however, they exhibited partial complementary that was reality-
consistent for the first time under theoretically predicted conditions; that is, critical 
distractors were more likely to be remembered as what they are than as what they are not.
Experiment 6
The manipulation that we studied in Experiment 6 should decrease target recollection. 
Theoretically, the effect on memory ought to be similar to Experiment 5 in one respect and 
different in another. Here, remember that repetition affected complementarity across-the-
board, forcing the complementarity ratio in a reality-consistent direction for all items. If 
some other manipulation decreases target recollection, relative to a control condition like 
that in Experiment 5, the complementarity ratio for all items should now be forced toward 0, 
which is the reality-reversed direction. For NS items, that follows from the fact that for 
them, decreasing target recollection shrinks R/(1− R) relative to P, forcing complementarity 
ratios toward 0. For O items, the same effect follows because decreasing target recollection 
shrinks RO and increases (1− RO)SO in the expression for p(O?) but simply increases (1− 
RO)SO in the expression for p(NS?). Thus, p(O?) will decrease, p(NS?) will increase, and 
the complementarity ratio is again forced toward 0. Notice, too, that when the ratio moves 
toward 0, the consequences for complementarity depend on where it starts. For critical 
distractors, the starting value is so close to .5 that movement toward 0 will mean decreased 
complementarity, as it did in Experiment 5 when the ratio moved toward 1. For weak NS 
items and O items, however, the fact that they start above .5 will mean increased 
complementarity as their respective ratios move toward 0.
The specific manipulation that we implemented, speeded testing, has a venerable history in 
memory research, and there is a literature in which its effects on false memory have been 
studied (for a review, see Brainerd & Reyna, 2005). In order to control the precise amount of 
retrieval time that subjects are permitted before they respond to memory probes, the relevant 
experiments used Dosher’s (1984) response-signal paradigm. A general conclusion that has 
emerged from that research, which makes speeded testing pertinent here, is that retrieval of 
the information that supports vivid recollection of O items is a slower process than retrieval 
of the information that supports false alarms to NS items. Two retrieval-time effects support 
that conclusion. First, false alarm rates for NS items are higher when the amount of retrieval 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 25
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

time is short (e.g., ≤ 750 msec) rather than long (e.g., ≥ 1,500 msec). Second, hit rates for O 
items are lower when retrieval time is short, and importantly, hits are less often accompanied 
by realistic recollective phenomenology. The latter finding is obtained for both behavioral 
measures of recollective phenomenology (e.g., R judgments in remember/know; Brainerd & 
Reyna, 2005) and neurophysiological measures (e.g., the 400–800 msec parietal component 
of event-related potentials; Curran & Doyle, 2011). Because signal lag is manipulated after 
list presentation, these are retrieval effects. Taken together, they suggest that short retrieval 
times selectively impair target recollection. If so, short retrieval times should decrease the R 
and RO parameters in Equations 1–4, producing the above-mentioned effects on 
complementarity.
We evaluated these predictions in a response-signal experiment. The design was a replication 
of Experiment 2, except with a response-signal manipulation. More specifically, instead of 
responding to self-paced O? and NS? probes, subjects responded following either short (500 
msec) or long (1,500 msec) retrieval intervals.
Method
Subjects—The subjects were 100 undergraduates, who participated to fulfill a course 
requirement. Half of the subjects were randomly assigned to a 1,500 msec signal delay 
condition and half were assigned to a 500 msec signal delay condition.
Materials and Procedure—For both signal delay conditions, the materials and 
procedures for the study phase were identical to Experiment 2. Subjects listened to audio 
files of 16 DRM lists that had been randomly sampled from the Stadler et al. (1999) norms. 
However, the test phase differed from Experiment 2. Although the instructions about the 
types of test items and how to respond to O? and NS? probes were the same as before, 
responses to probes were no longer self-paced. Instead, subjects were required to respond 
within 350 msec after hearing an audio signal (tone), with the signal delay being 500 msec 
for half the subjects and 1,500 msec for the other half. The details of the response-signal 
procedure run as follows.
After completing the study phase, the subject read the same instructions as in Experiment 2, 
except for the addition of instructions about the response-signal procedure. The latter 
informed the subject that when a test item appeared on the computer screen, he/she should 
not respond until a tone sounded, after which he/she should respond immediately by 
pressing the Y(yes) or N(no) keys on the computer keyboard. After reading the instructions, 
the subject completed a practice test, on which the signal delay was 500 msec for the 
subjects in that condition and was 1,500 msec for the subjects in that condition. The deadline 
for responding was 350 msec following the tone. After each response, the subject’s response 
time appeared in the center of the screen, and when it exceeded 350 msec, the message “too 
slow – answer more quickly” also appeared on the screen.
Following the practice test, the subject proceeded to the actual test, which consisted of the 
same 144 items and probes as in Experiment 2. For subjects in the 500 msec condition, a 
probe question (old? or new-similar?) first appeared on the screen for 1,000 msec. Then, a 
test word (e.g., chair) appeared on the screen for 500 msec, disappeared, and the tone 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 26
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

signaled the subject to respond immediately. After the Y or N response, the subject’s 
response time appeared in the center of the screen, and when it exceeded 350 msec, the 
message “too slow – answer more quickly” also appeared on the screen. Next, a fixation 
cross was displayed for 1,000 msec before presentation of the next probe and test item. The 
order of the 144 items and test probes was separately randomized for each subject. For 
subjects in the 1,500 msec condition, the procedure was identical, except that each test item 
remained on the screen for 1,500 msec before it disappeared and the tone signaled the 
subject to respond.
In Figure 7, we display the bias-corrected acceptance probabilities for O? and NS? probes 
for the three types of test items. The data for the 1,500 msec condition (Panel A) are roughly 
comparable to the control condition of Experiment 5. Strong NS items exhibited complete 
complementarity, and so did weak NS items. O items displayed partial complementarity, 
which was reality-consistent [i.e., p(O?) > p(NS?)]. The results for the 500 msec condition 
were notably different (Figure 7B). First, strong NS items now showed only partial 
complementarity that was reality-reversed [i.e., p(O?) > p(NS?)], with a complementarity 
ratio of .38. Second, weak NS items also displayed partial complementarity that was reality-
reversed, but the degree of reversal was quite modest (a complementarity ratio of .44). Third, 
O items displayed partial complementarity that was reality-consistent, with a 
complementarity ration of .63 (in contrast to .82 in the 1,500 msec condition). Thus, as 
expected on theoretical grounds, a manipulation that should decrease target recollection, 
drove all three complementarity ratios toward 0. The absolute level of complementarity 
decreased for strong and weak NS items, whose complementarity ratios were close .5 in the 
1,500 msec condition, but it increased for O items, whose complementarity ratio was close 
to .9 in the 1,500 msec condition.
The main statistical analysis was a 2 (signal delay: 500 vs. 1,500 msec) X 2 (condition: O? 
vs. NS? probes) X 3 (item: strong NS vs. weak NS vs. O) ANOVA of the bias-corrected 
means of p(O?) and p(NS?) for the three types of items. As in Experiment 5, there were two 
key results, which in this case were a Condition X Item interaction, F(2, 196) = 8.32, MSE 
= .06, ηp2 = .08 and a Signal Delay X Condition X Item interaction, F(2, 116) = 9.06, MSE 
= .06, ηp2 = .09. Naturally, the Condition X Item interaction occurred because, as in all prior 
experiments, the order of overall acceptance probabilities for the three types of items was 
different for O? probes versus NS? probes. Post hoc tests showed that the order was strong 
NS > O > weak NS for O? probes but was strong NS > weak NS > O for NS? probes. The 
reason for the Signal Delay X Condition X Item interaction is that signal delay also affected 
these orderings. In the 1,500 msec condition, post hoc tests indicated that the order was 
strong NS = O > weak NS for O? probes and strong NS > weak NS > O for NS? probes. In 
the 500 msec condition, on the other hand, post hoc tests indicated that the order was strong 
NS > O = weak NS for O? probes and strong NS > weak NS > O for NS? probes. At the 
level of item response probabilities, signal delay changed the orders because it had two 
specific effects on O? probes: It substantially decreased the acceptance probability of list 
words while substantially increasing the acceptance probability of critical distractors.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 27
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

As mentioned, the important effect of the signal delay manipulation was to drive all of the 
complementarity ratios toward 0 in the 500 msec condition. In the 1,500 msec condition, the 
ratios for O, strong NS, and weak NS items were .81, .48, and .55, respectively. The O ratio 
was reliably different from .5 [i.e., p(O?) > p(NS?); t(49) = 6.51], but the two NS ratios were 
not. In the 500 msec condition, the corresponding ratios for O, strong NS, and weak NS 
items were .63, .38, and .44, respectively. The O ratio was reliably different from .5 [i.e., 
p(O?) > p(NS?); t(49) = 2.18] and so was the strong NS ratio [i.e., p(NS?) > p(O?); t(49) = 
3.56], but the weak NS ratio was not.
In short, the overall picture is that a manipulation that is thought to decrease target 
recollection by impairing retrieval of verbatim traces of list words affected complementarity 
across-the-board by driving all complementarity ratios toward 0. This contrasts with 
Experiment 5, in which a manipulation that is thought to increase target recollection by 
enhancing retrieval of verbatim traces of list words affected complementarity across-the-
board by driving all complementarity ratios toward 1. Together, the two experiments indicate 
that in the DRM paradigm, the level and direction of complementarity for all three types of 
test items can be changed by manipulating subjects’ ability to access verbatim memories of 
the presentation of list words.
General Discussion
The research that we have reported revolved around a single question: Exactly what type of 
illusion is induced by the DRM paradigm? Is it a reality-reversal illusion, in which critical 
distractors are remembered as what they are not (old) at high levels and as what they are 
(new-similar) at low levels? Is it a complementarity illusion, in which critical distractors are 
remembered both as what they are and as what they are not at high levels? Reality reversal is 
the traditional interpretation, whereas complementarity has not been carefully evaluated. 
Certain findings seem especially supportive of reality reversal, but such evidence is limited 
by the fact that prior experiments provided subjects with the opportunity to remember 
whether items old but not with the opportunity to remember whether items were new-
similar.
It is essential to measure both because episodic memory, like preference and some other 
forms of judgment and decision making, may be complementary over judgments about 
logically incompatible reality states (Brainerd et al., 2015). We filled in the missing design 
cell in our experiments and introduced a convenient performance statistic, the 
complementarity ratio, which delivers quantitative information about levels of 
complementarity and about whether performance is reality-reversed or reality-consistent. 
The weight of evidence from this metric fell on the side of DRM lists inducing 
complementarity illusions rather than reality-reversal illusions; that is, the proportions of 
critical distractors that were judged to be old and new-similar were roughly comparable.
In the present section, we briefly discuss three matters that bear on this conclusion and 
briefly present results from an additional experiment. First, we step back from the individual 
experiments and consider broad empirical patterns that cut across them, particularly trends 
that were predicted on theoretical grounds. Second, we evaluate the mathematical relation 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 28
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

between measured levels of complementarity and estimates of the conjoint recognition 
model’s parameters. In that connection, we know that the model posits a specific relation 
between complementarity ratios for NS items and the parameters that measure its two 
recollective processes. The results of the last two experiments were consistent with that 
relation but did not directly test it. We do that below. Third, we evaluate a different approach 
to explaining high levels of complementarity for critical distractors, which assumes that 
items’ perceived reality states are strongly influenced by the types of memory judgments 
that are made about them. We report further data that provide differential tests of this 
judgment-dependency explanation.
Experiment-wide Patterns
Several results point to the conclusion that DRM lists induce complementary illusions, but 
four patterns are especially probative. The first is for list words versus critical distractors. A 
key finding that is taken to support reality reversal is that list items and critical distractors 
are often indistinguishable on recognition tests—hit and false alarm rates are approximately 
equal (e.g., Gallo, 2006). We found that this result is dependent on which reality state is 
tested. Under conditions that are common in the literature (Experiment 2, the immediate 
testing condition of Experiment 3, the control condition of Experiment 5, and the 1,500 
msec condition of Experiment 6), NS? probes produced excellent separation between list 
words and critical distractors. The second pattern is for critical distractors per se. Under the 
same standard conditions, the modal finding for critical distractors was strong 
complementarity; that is, complementarity ratios that were in the neighborhood of .5. The 
third pattern is that strong complementarity was not confined to critical distractors, but to 
varying degrees, it spilled over to weak NS items. The modal finding for weak NS items was 
a mixture of reality-consistent partial complementarity and complete complementarity (e.g., 
in the control condition of Experiment 5 and the 1,500 msec condition of Experiment 6). As 
predicted theoretically, the contrasting finding for list items was weak, reality-consistent, 
complementarity, with complementarity ratios that often approached 1 (perfect 
compensation). The fourth pattern is that the despite reality reversal being the dominant 
view of the DRM illusion, there was very little evidence of it. Reality reversal corresponds to 
complementarity ratios for critical distractors that approach 0, but in the event, most were 
close to .5.
Beyond answering the core question of what type of illusion DRM lists induce, the most 
instructive thing about these patterns is their consistency with the theoretical distinctions that 
motivated the research. Remember that beyond explaining how complementarity can result 
from familiar memory processes, the implementation of those distinctions in the conjoint 
recognition model generated a series of parameter-free predictions. One group of 
predictions, on which all of the experiments supplied data, was concerned with the relative 
strengths of complementarity effects for different types of test items. The main predictions 
were that complementarity would be more marked for strong NS items than for weak NS or 
O items and that O items would exhibit far weaker complementarity than either type of NS 
item, leading to an overall complementarity ordering of strong NS > weak NS > O. Those 
predictions were borne out in most conditions of most experiments. To illustrate: 
Complementarity was always stronger for both types of NS items than for O items, except in 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 29
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

two nonstandard conditions, one in Experiment 3 and one in Experiment 6; the most robust 
complementarity (ratios closest to .5) was always observed for strong NS items, except in 
two nonstandard conditions, one in Experiment 3 and one in Experiment 6; O items never 
displayed complete complementarity in any condition of any experiment; the order of 
complementarity was strong NS > weak NS > O, except in three nonstandard conditions, 
one in Experiment 3, one in Experiment 5, and one in Experiment 6.
A second group of predictions, which figured in Experiments 5 and 6, was concerned with 
the types of manipulations that should reduce the marked complementarity that strong NS 
items displayed under standard conditions, by forcing complementarity ratios away from .5, 
toward 1 or 0. The conjoint recognition model says that the simplest way to force 
complementarity ratios toward 1 is via manipulations that inflate target recollection, and the 
simplest way to force complementarity ratios toward 0 is via manipulations that deflate it. 
We studied a manipulation of the first type in Experiment 5, list repetition. We found that the 
complementarity ratio for strong NS items was reliably larger than .5 (i.e., reality-consistent) 
when DRM lists were presented twice rather than once. We studied a manipulation of the 
second type in Experiment 6, speeded testing. Now, the complementarity ratio for strong NS 
items was reliably smaller than .5 (i.e., reality-reversed) when subjects were permitted only a 
brief amount of retrieval time before they had to respond to memory probes.
Three conclusions follow. First, although complementarity troubles our intuition, the data 
show that it is a hallmark of the DRM illusion. Second, this fact seems less counterintuitive 
when we consider that complementarity is a consequence of familiar theoretical distinctions 
about the types of representations that are retrieved on memory probes. Third, those same 
distinctions point to successful ways to gain leverage on the amount and direction of 
complementarity.
Complementarity and Dual Recollection Processes
In the conjoint recollection model, there are two recollection processes that influence 
subjects’ responses to NS items in opposite ways—target recollection (parameter R) and 
context recollection (parameter P.). The mathematical relation between these processes 
controls the level of complementarity for NS items and whether it lies in the reality-reversed 
or the reality-consistent direction. We know that the level and direction of complementarity 
is captured by the difference between the empirical probabilities pNS(O?) and pNS(NS?): 
Memory is completely complementary, partially complementary and reality-reversed, or 
partially complementary and reality-consistent accordingly as pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) is 0, > 0, 
or < 0. The model posits that this is controlled by the mix of target recollection and context 
recollection. In particular, pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) is 0, > 0, or < 0 accordingly as R/(1−R) = P, 
R/(1−R) < P, or R/(1−R) > P because pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) = R/(1−R) − P.
In our experiments, we exploited this hypothesized relation to identify manipulations that 
ought to drive complementarity in either a reality-reversed or reality-consistent direction, but 
we did not evaluate the relation itself. That is only possible with full conjoint recognition 
designs in which the model is fit to sample data and its parameters are estimated. 
Experiments 2–6 were not of that sort because only the O? and NS? conditions are needed to 
study complementarity. However, the corpus of data sets that were used in Experiment 1 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 30
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

involved full conjoint recognition designs, and thus, they are sufficient to test the model’s 
predicted relation between complementarity and the two recollection processes. Those data 
sets allowed us to evaluate the prediction for three different types of NS items—namely, 
strong NS items in the DRM sub-corpus, weak NS items in the DRM sub-corpus, and NS 
items in the non-DRM sub-corpus.
Recall that the bias-corrected expressions for accepting O? and NS? probes for NS items are 
pNS(O?) = (1−R)P + (1−R)(1P)SNS and pNS(NS?) = R + (1− R)(1− P)SNS, from which it 
follows that pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) = (1−R)P − R. This means that performance (a) will be 
completely complementarity whenever P = R/(1−R), (b) will be partially complementary and 
reality-reversed whenever P > R/(1−R), and (c) will be partially complementary and reality-
consistent whenever P < R/(1−R). More generally, over many experiments and conditions, 
variation in the empirical quantity pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) should be a linear function of 
variation in the theoretical quantity R/(1−R) − P. In order to test that prediction, we 
estimated the model’s parameters separately for the strong NS data sets in the DRM sub-
corpus of Experiment 1, for the weak NS data sets in the DRM sub-corpus, and for the data 
sets in the non-DRM sub-corpus. With respect to how the model’s parameters were 
estimated, details of its parameter estimation machinery are provided elsewhere (Brainerd et 
al., 2014). Briefly, the model’s parameter space is identifiable, and hence, its parameters can 
be estimated for any data set by expressing its equations (e.g., Equations 1–4) in a standard 
likelihood function, in which the data appear as observable states. The function is then 
maximized, yielding maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters for those data.
Using the parameter estimates, we computed the quantity R/(1−R) − P for each data set and 
fit it to the value of pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) for that data set. The results appear in Figure 8, 
where Panel A displays the strong NS results for the DRM sub-corpus, Panel B displays the 
weak NS results for the DRM sub-corpus, and Panel C displays the results for the non-DRM 
sub-corpus.
Three overall patterns are apparent. First, there is a strong linear relation between pNS(O?) − 
pNS(NS?) and R/(1−R) − P in all three fits, with individual fits for the strong NS DRM, 
weak NS DRM, and non-DRM data accounting for 71%, 81%, and 72% of the variance, 
respectively. Second, inspection of the point clouds reveals no obvious evidence of 
nonlinearity, and when standard two-parameter nonlinear functions (power, exponential, 
logarithmic) were fit to these data, none accounted for significantly more variance than the 
linear fits. It should perhaps be added that the first few entries in the point cloud for the non-
DRM sub-corpus (Panel C) seem to suggest positive acceleration at the start of the function, 
but the suggestion is only that: There was no statistically reliable departure from linearity 
when nonlinear functions were fit to those data. Third, note that the intercept, the estimated 
point at which pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) crosses the Y axis, is very close to 0 in all three panels 
of Figure 8. Therefore, we refit each of the functions with the intercept set at 0. Although the 
refits naturally accounted for less variance than the unconstrained fits (A = 68%, B = 73%, C 
= 70%), none of the reductions was statistically reliable. All of the intercepts were 0 to a 
statistically acceptable approximation, and hence, pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) was a ratio scale 
transformation of R/(1−R) − P in all three fits.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 31
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Inspection of the best-fitting functions in Figure 8 reveals large differences in their 
respective slope parameters, which measure the rates at which pNS(O?) − pNS(NS?) 
increased as a function of increases in R/(1−R) − P. The increase was steepest for the strong 
NS DRM data sets, with a unit change in R/(1−R) − P producing approximately a unit (.91) 
change in p(O?) − p(NS?). The increase was moderately steep for the weak NS DRM data 
sets, with a unit change in R/(1−R) − P producing nearly three-quarters of a unit (.72) 
change in p(O?) − p(NS?). Last, the increase was shallower for non-DRM data sets, with a 
unit change in R/(1−R) − P producing roughly one-third of a unit (.38) change in p(O?) − 
p(NS?). The differences among these slope parameters were statistically reliable. When the 
three functions were refit under the constraint that their respective slope parameters were 
equal, that produced significant reductions in the variance that all three functions accounted 
for.
Finally, because estimates were available for P, R, and also for the semantic familiarity 
parameter SNS, we were able to investigate two further questions of theoretical interest. The 
first concerns the two routes to complementarity that were discussed earlier: (a) Some NS 
items are perceived to occupy both the O and NS states, causing both O? and NS? probes to 
be accepted for such items, and (b) other items are perceived to occupy only the O state or 
only the NS state, causing the former to be accepted on O? probes but the latter to be 
accepted on NS? probes. The first route involves items that provoke semantic familiarity on 
memory tests, and its probability is given by the (1−R)(1− P)SNS term in Equations 1 and 2. 
The second route involves items that provoke target recollection, with probability R in 
Equation 1, and items that provoke context recollection, with probability (1−R)P in Equation 
2. Thus, estimates of these parameters can be used to calculate the extent to which 
complementarity is due to one or the other route in the sub-corpora of Experiment 1.
The results appear in Table 2. The mean estimates of P, R, and SNS for strong and weak NS 
items in the DRM sub-corpus and for NS items in non-DRM sub-corpus appear in the upper 
half of the table. The mean estimates of the corresponding proportions of items that are 
perceived to occupy both states, only O, or only NS by virtue of semantic familiarity, context 
recollection, or target recollection, respectively, appear in the bottom half of the table 1. 
Three instructive patterns are apparent.
First, a distinguishing feature of critical distractors, relative to the other two types of NS 
items, is that memory superposes a high percentage of them on the incompatible O and NS 
states. The values are 21% for critical distractors versus 11% for both weak NS items in the 
DRM sub-corpus and NS items in the non-DRM sub-corpus. Second, complementarity for 
critical distractors is due to a roughly equal measure to (a) items that memory superposes on 
the two reality states (21%) and (b) the fact that the percentages of items that provoke target 
recollection or context recollection (19%) are equal. Third, complementarity is different and 
lower for each of the other two types of NS items because (c) the percentage of items that 
are perceived to belong to both of the O and NS states is so much lower, and (d) the 
percentage of items that provoke target recollection is so much higher than the percentage 
that provokes context recollection (16% vs. 7% for weak NS items and 31% vs. 14% for 
non-DRM NS items).
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 32
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Item-Dependent versus Judgment-Dependent Retrieval
The probes in our experiments may be thought of as retrieval cues with two components. 
The components are (a) an item that belongs to an objective reality state (O, NS, or ND), 
together with (b) a hypothesized reality state that a judgment must be made about (O? NS?). 
The objective and hypothesized states may or may not agree. In order to make a judgment, 
subjects must implicitly identify the item’s reality state, using information that is retrieved 
from memory, or if that is not possible, rely on bias processes to generate a judgment. An 
important theoretical question is, which component of a probe controls the memories that 
are retrieved to identify the item’s reality state and which controls bias levels? The conjoint 
recognition model posits that the item controls memory retrieval, and the judgment controls 
bias levels (Brainerd, Reyna, & Mojardin, 1999). These assumptions are testable because 
they place two strong mathematical constraints on the model’s parameters.
One is that bias levels will be different for O? versus NS? judgments, and further, that they 
will higher for NS? judgments because identification of the NS state relies on negative 
memory evidence. Reported bias levels are higher for NS? judgments (e.g., Singer & 
Remillard, 2008; Singer & Spears, 2015). That is also true of the large data corpus in 
Experiment 1. There, the mean values of the model’s bias parameters for O? and NS? 
judgments were bO? = .18 and bNS? = .30 for the strong DRM sub-corpus, bO? = .16 and 
bNS? = .27 for the weak DRM sub-corpus, and bO? = .14 and bNS? = .28 for the non-DRM 
sub-corpus. In short, the judgment component a marked effect on bias, producing levels that 
were roughly 75% higher for NS? judgments.
The other constraint is on the memory parameters in Equations 1–4: If the item component 
but not the judgment component determines the memories that are retrieved to identify the 
item’s reality state, then the same parameters with the same values must appear in the 
model’s expressions for O? and NS? This is commonly known as a parameter invariance 
assumption (e.g., Graf & Komatsu, 1994; Klauer, Dittrich, Scholtes, & Voss, 2015), and it is 
of particular importance when interpreting our complementarity results. Suppose that the 
assumption is incorrect, and the judgment component, as well as the item component, 
determines the memories that are retrieved to identify reality states. If so, complementarity 
can occur in a different way, in which an item’s perceived reality state depends both on the 
item and on the type of judgment that must be made about it. To see how that could happen, 
assume that when the test item is held constant, the memories that it accesses are different 
when the judgment emphasizes oldness than when it emphasizes similarity. Explicitly, 
assume that (a) subjects selectively search for content that supports oldness with O? 
judgments, but (b) they selectively search for content that supports similarity with NS? 
judgments. That should produce significant complementarity because DRM lists and other 
semantically-related materials generate both types of memories.
Unlike the conjoint recognition account, which predicts complementarity, judgment 
dependency only explains it after the fact. Further, there are four considerations that run 
counter to this alternative explanation. The first is that the conjoint recognition account’s 
parameter invariance assumption is testable by goodness-of-fit statistics. The fit statistics for 
memory models are sensitive to violations of the parameter invariance assumption (see 
Brainerd et al., 1999), and in fact, violations of this assumption are among the most common 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 33
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

reasons for fit failures (Klauer et al., 2015). We mentioned that the conjoint recognition 
model is known to fit DRM data well, and thus, the assumption that memory retrieval is 
controlled by the item component and not by the judgment component (O? vs. NS?) has 
been confirmed statistically.
The second consideration is that the judgment-dependency explanation does not differentiate 
between the levels of complementarity that are predicted for NS items versus O items. On 
the contrary, if the memory information that is accessed to identify an item’s reality state is 
controlled by whether the judgment emphasizes oldness or similarity, the straightforward 
prediction is that when strong complementarity is observed for one, it will be observed for 
the other. In contrast, the conjoint recognition account expects strong complementarity for 
NS items under certain combinations of parameter values, but rules it out for O items. The 
results of our experiments were consistent with that prediction. For the judgment-
dependency account to explain those results, additional assumptions would have to be 
introduced that would, in some way, constrain judgment-dependent retrieval to operate for 
NS items but not for O items. There may be various assumptions that would deliver such 
constraints, but invoking such assumptions means that judgment-dependent retrieval 
becomes a less parsimonious route to complementarity.
The third consideration is that judgment dependency has an unfortunate consequence for the 
adaptiveness of retrieval. To the extent that the memory content that identifies an item’s 
reality state is controlled by whether a judgment emphasizes oldness versus similarity, then 
to that extent retrieval loses the adaptive property of consistently identifying an item as 
belonging to the same reality state in different testing contexts. This property is adaptive 
because, of course, an item’s objective reality state is invariant over testing contexts, but 
judgment dependency surrenders it in order to explain complementarity. The conjoint 
recognition account does not. For O items, target and context recollection cause them to be 
correctly perceived as old for both O? and NS? judgments. For NS items, on the other hand, 
target and context recollection also identify the same reality state for both O? and NS? 
judgments, but complementarity emerges because they identify different reality states.
The fourth consideration is that the judgment-dependency explanation can also be tested in a 
very simple way, without resorting to model fits. Consider the following modification to the 
memory tests that were administered in our experiments. Rather than administering one 
probe per item (O? or NS?), suppose that two probes are administered, which may be either 
the same (i.e., O1? followed by O2? or NS1? followed by NS2?) or different (i.e., O1? 
followed by NS2? or NS1? followed by O2?). Suppose that there is sufficient spacing 
between them that short-term memory for responses to the first probe is not an issue on the 
second. The judgment-dependency explanation posits that subjects selectively search their 
memories for information that favors the old state for O? judgments and for information that 
favors the new-similar state for NS? judgments. If so, an initial O? test provides practice at 
retrieving content that favors the old state, whereas an initial NS? test provides practice at 
retrieving content that favors the new-similar state.
This leads to three obvious predictions about the modified testing design, one about 
performance on Test 2 and the others about changes in performance between Test 1 and Test 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 34
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

2. The first prediction concerns how subjects should perform on Test 2 when they receive an 
O? probe for an O item or an NS? probe for an NS item. Clearly, performance on the O? 
probe should be better if Test 1 was also an O? probe, and performance on the NS? probe 
should be better if Test 1 was also an NS? probe: The first O? probe provides practice are 
retrieving memories that will support the old state on the second O? probe, and the first NS? 
probe provides practice at retrieving memories that will support the new-similar state on the 
second NS? probe. The other two predictions are about facilitation and inference effects 
between Test 1 and Test 2. Concerning facilitation, consider the situation that we just 
described in which a Test 2 O? probe for an O item is preceded by a Test 1 O? probe, and a 
Test 2 NS? probe for an NS item is preceded by a Test 1 NS? probe. The practice effect from 
selective retrieval on Test 1 should facilitate accuracy on Test 2, causing accuracy to increase 
between Test 1 and Test 2. Concerning interference, consider the situation in which we 
compare performance on Test 1 O? probes for old items to performance on Test 2 O? probes 
for old items that had a Test 1 NS? probe, and consider the situation in which we compare 
performance on Test 1 NS? probes for new-similar items to performance on Test 2 NS? 
probes for new-similar items that had a Test 1 O? probe. In both instances, accuracy should 
decline between Test 1 and Test 2 because the type of retrieval practice on Test 1 works 
against the information that needs to be retrieved on Test 2.
We conducted a simple experiment that tested all three judgment-dependency predictions. 
The subjects were 60 undergraduates who participated to fulfill a course requirement. The 
materials were drawn from a pool of 200 DRM lists, consisting of 4 list words plus a critical 
distractor per list. These types of lists were originally developed to induce the DRM illusion 
with very few words, by selecting only list words with high backward associative strength 
(BAS) to their critical distractors (e.g., Atkins & Reuter-Lorenz, 2011). The mean BAS of 
the 72 lists that were administered to the present subjects was .42. The design involved three 
study-test cycles, followed by a final recognition test. During each cycle, 24 of the 72 lists 
were presented (2 sec per word, with a 8 sec pause between consecutive lists), followed by 
test instructions like those in Experiment 2, followed by a 72-item recognition test [1 O item 
per list + 1 NS item per list (the critical distractor) + 24 ND items drawn from unpresented 
DRM lists]. For each of these three types of test items, half the probes were O? and half 
were NS?. Following the third study-test cycle, the subjects performed 5 min of buffer 
activity (solving arithmetic problems) and then received instructions for the final recognition 
test, which consisted of 144 items (48 O, 48 NS, 48 ND). The probes were for 48 lists that 
had been randomly selected from the 72 presented lists, and each item had been previously 
tested with either an O? or NS? probe. For each type of item, the probe was O? for 24 items 
and NS? for 24 items, and within each of these two groups the probe was either same as the 
earlier test or different. Thus, for the 48 items of each type (O, NS, ND) there were 12 items 
with each of the following probe pairs: O1?−O2?, NS1? −O2?, NS1? −NS2?, and O1? −NS2?
The key findings are displayed in Table 3, and they run against all of the judgment-
dependency predictions. With respect to the first, note that the values of p(O2?│O) were 
roughly the same regardless of whether the prior test was an O? probe on an NS? probe (.71 
vs. .65), and note that the values of p(NS2?│NS) were roughly the same regardless of 
whether the prior test was an O? probe or an NS? probe (.64 vs. .59). Neither difference was 
statistically reliable. Turning to the second prediction, the facilitation effect of selective 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 35
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

search means that p(O2?│O) > p(O1?│O) and p(NS2?│O) > p(NS1?│O). However, it can 
be seen at the top of Table 3 that neither prediction was borne out. For O items, p(O2?│O) 
= .71 versus p(O1?│O) = .69, and for NS items, +p(NS2?│NS) =.58 versus p(NS1?│NS) 
= .59. Neither difference was statistically reliable. Finally, concerning the third prediction, 
the interference effect of selective search means that p(O1?│O) > and p(O2?│O) when the 
latter was preceded by a Test 1 NS? probe, and that p(NS1?│NS) > and p(NS2?│NS) when 
the latter was preceded by a Test 1 O? probe. It can be seen at the bottom of Table 3 
(diagonal arrows) that neither of these predictions was borne out either. For O items, p(O1?
│O) = .67 versus p(O2?│O) = .65, and for NS items, p(NS1?│NS) =.62 versus p(NS2?
│NS) = .64.
Summing up, this simple experiment provided ample opportunity to secure evidence in 
support of the hypothesis that subjects selectively search memory for content that supports 
the type of judgment that they are asked to make about an item. This hypothesis predicts 
three different effects, and the power to detect them was excellent because the number of 
replications and subjects were both large. Because each effect had two parts, one for O items 
and one for NS items, there were actually six opportunities to detect an effect that is 
predicted by the hypothesis. None of those effects was detected, and hence, there was no 
evidence that subjects selectively search memory for content that supports the judgments 
they are asked to make.
Concluding Comments
To conclude, it is reasonable to ask about the larger theoretical significance of the results of 
Experiments 1–6. We briefly note three points in that connection. First and most obviously, 
the DRM illusion is not the type of distortion that we thought it was. This illusion has long 
been viewed as a reality reversal, in which new-similar items and old items are remembered 
in the same way, and that view has guided how the illusion has been used to understand 
episodic memory. It is not a reality reversal, however, because new-similar and old items are 
actually remembered in fundamentally different ways—compensatory memory for old items 
but complementary memory for new-similar items. The reason this pattern has not been 
previously identified is that it cannot be detected with traditional O? tests. The pattern’s 
larger significance is that, apparently, the DRM illusion is a powerful tool for studying 
noncompensatory memory processes; that is, processes that cause an item’s reality state to 
be perceived in mutually contradictory ways.
Second, our results provide a compelling demonstration of an unsuspected parallel between 
episodic memory and the well-known illusions and biases of judgment and decision making. 
In the latter, it is well established that reasoning violates the simple rule of logical exclusion 
inasmuch as humans often make judgments and decisions about medical treatment, 
investment, education, and so forth that are mutually contradictory (e.g., Tversky & Koehler, 
1994). Experiments 1–6 generated considerable evidence that the same is true in the memory 
sphere. It appears that some types of memory content violate logical exclusion because they 
support mutually incompatible reality states for the same item. Semantic gist is the prime 
example. It is measured by the semantic familiarity parameter of conjoint recognition, and 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 36
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

those measurements indicated that it was responsible for roughly half of the complementary 
that was observed for new-similar items.
Third, our results also provide a convincing demonstration that recollection is bivariate 
rather than univariate. That demonstration takes the form of a deeply paradoxical effect in 
which complementarity at the level of judgment emerges from compensation at the level of 
process. We saw that bivariate recollection operations are individually compensatory over 
mutually incompatible reality states: Target recollection causes NS items to be correctly 
perceived as NS on both O? and NS? probes, and context recollection causes the same items 
to be in correctly perceived as O on both types of probes. However, we also saw that the two 
recollections are jointly complementary, and that they will tend to produce complete 
complementarity when their impact on memory performance is roughly equivalent. Our data 
showed that this paradoxical effect was responsible for the other half of the complementarity 
that we observed for new-similar items.
Acknowledgments
The research reported in this article was supported by National Institutes of Health (National Institute on Aging) 
grant 1RC1AG036915 and National Institutes of Health (National Institute of Nursing Research) grant 
RO1NR014368-01.
References
Abadie M, Waroquier L, Terrier P. Gist memory in the unconscious-thought effect. Psychological 
Science. 2013; 24:1253–1259. [PubMed: 23698616] 
Arndt J. False recollection: Empirical findings and their theoretical implications. Psychology of 
Learning and Motivation. 2012; 56:81–124.
Atkins AS, Reuter-Lorenz PA. Neural mechanisms of semantic interference and false recognition in 
short-term memory. NeuroImage. 2011; 56:1726–1734. [PubMed: 21349335] 
Beversdorf DQ, Smith BW, Crucian GP, Anderson JM, Keillor JM, Barrett AM, Heilman KM. 
Increased discrimination of “false memories” in autism spectrum disorder. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2000; 97:8734–8737. [PubMed: 
10900024] 
Bookbinder SH, Brainerd CJ. Emotionally negative pictures enhance gist memory. Emotion. 2017; 
17:102–119. [PubMed: 27454002] 
Bouwmeester S, Verkoeijen PPJL. Latent variable modeling of cognitive processes in true and false 
recognition of words: A developmental perspective. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 
2010; 139:365–381. [PubMed: 20438256] 
Brainerd CJ, Gomes CFA, Moran R. The two recollections. Psychological Review. 2014; 121:563–
599. [PubMed: 25347309] 
Brainerd CJ, Forrest TJ, Karibian D, Reyna VF. Development of the false-memory illusion. 
Developmental Psychology. 2006; 42:662–679.
Brainerd CJ, Poole DA. Long-term survival of children’s false memories: A review. Learning and 
Individual Differences. 1997; 9:125–152.
Brainerd, CJ., Reyna, VF. The science of false memory. New York: Oxford University Press; 2005. 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF. Explaining developmental reversals in false memory. Psychological Science. 
2007; 18:442–448. [PubMed: 17576285] 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, Estrada S. Recollection rejection of false narrative statements. Memory. 2006; 
14:672–691. [PubMed: 16829486] 
Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, Mojardin AH. Conjoint recognition. Psychological Review. 1999; 106:160–
179. [PubMed: 10197365] 
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 37
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF, Zember E. Theoretical and forensic implications of developmental studies of 
the DRM illusion. Memory & Cognition. 2011; 39:365–380. [PubMed: 21264595] 
Brainerd CJ, Wang Z, Reyna VF, Nakamura K. Episodic memory does not add up: Verbatim–gist 
superposition predicts violations of the additive law of probability. Journal of Memory and 
Language. 2015; 84:224–245. [PubMed: 26236091] 
Brainerd CJ, Wright R. Forward associative strength, backward associative strength, and the false 
memory illusion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 2005; 
31:554–567.
Brainerd CJ, Yang Y, Howe ML, Reyna VF, Mills BA. Semantic processing in “associative” false 
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 2008; 15:1035–1053. [PubMed: 19001566] 
Budson AE, Todman RW, Chong H, Adams EH, Kensinger EA, Krangel TS. False recognition of 
emotional word lists in aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology. 2006; 
19:71–78. [PubMed: 16783129] 
Cann DR, McRae K, Katz AN. False recall in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott paradigm: The roles of 
gist and associative strength. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. 2011; 64:1515–1542.
Corbin JC, Reyna VF, Weldon RB, Brainerd CJ. How reasoning, judgment, and decision making are 
colored by gist-based intuition: A fuzzy-trace theory approach. Journal of Applied Research in 
Memory & Cognition. 2015; 4:344–355. [PubMed: 26664820] 
Curran T, Doyle J. Picture superiority doubly dissociates the ERP correlates of recollection and 
familiarity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 2011; 23:1247–1262. [PubMed: 20350169] 
Deese J. On the prediction of occurrence of certain verbal intrusions in free recall. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology. 1959; 58:17–22. [PubMed: 13664879] 
Dennis NA, Bowman CR, Vandekar SN. True and phantom recollection: An fMRI investigation of 
similar and distinct neural correlates and connectivity. Neuroimage. 2012; 59:2982–2993. 
[PubMed: 22001165] 
Dennis NA, Johnson CE, Peterson KM. Neural correlates underlying true and false associative 
memories. Brain and Cognition. 2014; 88:65–72. [PubMed: 24859815] 
Dewhurst SA. Category repetition and false recognition: Effects of instance frequency and category 
size. Journal of Memory and Language. 2001; 44:153–167.
Dosher BA. Degree of learning and retrieval speed: Study time and multiple exposures. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 1984; 10:541–574.
Gallo, DA. Associative illusions of memory: False memory research in DRM and related tasks. New 
York: Psychology Press; 2006. 
Gallo D. False memories and fantastic beliefs: 15 years of the DRM illusion. Memory & Cognition. 
2010; 7:833–848.
Gallo DA, Roberts MJ, Seamon JG. Remembering words not presented in lists: Can we avoid creating 
false memories? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 1997; 4:271–276. [PubMed: 21331837] 
Garoff RJ, Slotnick SD, Schacter DL. The neural origins of specific and general memory: the role of 
the fusiform cortex. Neuropsychologia. 2005; 43:847–859. [PubMed: 15716157] 
Gerkens DR, Smith SM. Effects of perceptual modality on verbatim and gist memory. Psychonomic 
Bulletin & Review. 2004; 11:143–149. [PubMed: 15117000] 
Goodman GS, Quas JA, Batterman-Faunce JM, Riddlesberger MM, Kuhn J. Predictors of accurate and 
inaccurate memories of traumatic events experienced in childhood. Consciousness and Cognition. 
1994; 3:269–294.
Graf P, Komatsu S. Process dissociation procedure: Handle with caution! European Journal of 
Cognitive Psychology. 1994; 6:113–129.
Healy AF, Kubovy M. Effects of payoffs and prior probabilities on indexes of performance and cutoff 
location in recognition memory. Memory & Cognition. 1978; 6:544–553. [PubMed: 24203388] 
Howe ML, Candel I, Otgaar H, Malone C, Wimmer MC. Valence and the development of immediate 
and long-term false memory illusions. Memory. 2010; 18:58–75. [PubMed: 20391177] 
Kintsch W, Welsch D, Schmalhofer F, Zimny S. Sentence memory: A theoretical analysis. Journal of 
Memory and Language. 1990; 29:133–159.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 38
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Klauer KC, Dittrich K, Scholtes C, Voss A. The invariance assumption in process-dissociation models: 
An evaluation across three domains. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 2915; 
144:198–221.
Koutstaal W. Older adults encode—but do not always use—perceptual details: Intentional versus 
unintentional effects of detail on memory judgments. Psychological Science. 2003; 14:189–193. 
[PubMed: 12661684] 
Kurkela KA, Dennis NA. Event-related fMRI studies of false memory: An activation likelihood 
estimation meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia. 2016; 81:149–167. [PubMed: 26683385] 
Lampinen JM, Odegard TN. Memory editing mechanisms. Memory. 2006; 14:649–654. [PubMed: 
16829484] 
Loftus EF. Leading questions and eyewitness report. Cognitive Psychology. 1975; 7:560–572.
McNally RJ, Clancy SA, Schacter DL. Directed forgetting of trauma cues in adults reporting 
repressed, recovered, or continuous memories of childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology. 2001; 110:355–359.
Nelson AB, Shiffrin RM. The co-evolution of knowledge and event memory. Psychological Review. 
2013; 120:356–394. [PubMed: 23458086] 
Odegard TN, Lampinen JM. Recollection rejection: Gist cuing of verbatim memory. Memory & 
Cognition. 2005; 33:1422–1430. [PubMed: 16615390] 
Payne DG, Elie CJ, Blackwell JM, Neuschatz JS. Memory illusions: Recalling, recognizing, and 
recollecting events that never occurred. Journal of Memory and Language. 1996; 35:261–285.
Poole DA, Lindsay DS, Memon A, Bull R. Psychotherapy and the recovery of memories of childhood 
sexual abuse: US and British practitioners’ opinions, practices, and experiences. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1995; 63:426–437. [PubMed: 7608355] 
Prohaska1 V, DelValle V, Toglia MP, Pittman AE. Reported serial positions of true and illusory 
memories in the Deese/Roediger/McDermott paradigm. Memory. 2016; 24:865–883. [PubMed: 
26275167] 
Reyna VF, Brainerd CJ. Fuzzy-trace theory: An interim synthesis. Learning and Individual 
Differences. 1995; 7:1–75.
Roediger HL III, McDermott KB. Creating false memories: Remembering words not presented on 
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. 1995; 21:803–814.
Roediger HL III, Watson JM, McDermott KB, Gallo DA. Factors that determine false recall: A 
multiple regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 2001; 8:385–405. [PubMed: 
11700893] 
Singer M, Remillard G. Veridical and false memory for text: A multiprocess analysis. Journal of 
Memory and Language. 2008; 59:18–35.
Singer M, Spear J. Phantom Recollection of bridging and elaborative inferences. Discourse Processes. 
2015; 52:356–375.
Slotnick SD. Does the hippocampus mediate objective binding or subjective remembering? 
NeuroImage. 2010; 49:1769–1776. [PubMed: 19786107] 
Slovic P, Lichtenstein S. Preference reversals: A broader perspective. The American Economic 
Review. 1983; 73:596–605.
Snodgrass JG, Corwin J. Pragmatics of measuring recognition memory: Applications to dementia and 
amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. 1988; 117:34–50. [PubMed: 2966230] 
Stadler MA, Roediger HL III, McDermott KB. Norms for word lists that create false memories. 
Memory & Cognition. 1999; 27:494–500. [PubMed: 10355238] 
Stone ER, Yates JF, Parker AM. Risk communication: Absolute versus relative expressions of low-
probability risks. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes. 1994; 60:387–408.
Toglia MP, Neuschatz JS, Goodwin KA. Recall accuracy and illusory memories: When more is less. 
Memory. 1999; 7:233–256. [PubMed: 10645381] 
Tversky A, Koehler DJ. Support theory: A nonextensional representation of subjective probability. 
Psychological Review. 1994; 101:547–567.
Tversky A, Slovic P, Kahneman D. The causes of preference reversal. American Economic Review. 
80:204–217.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 39
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Weekes BS, Hamilton Oakhill J, Holliday RE. False recollection in children with reading 
comprehension difficulties. Cognition. 2007; 106:222–233. [PubMed: 17349990] 
Wells GL, Small M, Penrod S, Malpass RS, Fulero SM, Brimacombe CAE. Eyewitness identification 
procedures: Recommendations for lineups and photospreads. Law and Human Behavior. 1998; 
23:603–648.
Yonelinas AP. The nature of recollection and familiarity: A review of 30 years of research. Journal of 
Memory and Language. 2002; 46:441–517.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 40
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
The mathematical relation between levels of complementarity for new-similar items and the 
processes of target recollection (parameter R of the conjoint recognition model) and context 
recollection (parameter P). p(O?) is the probability of accepting new-similar items on old 
probes, and p(NS?) is the probability of accepting them on new-similar probes. Complete 
complementarity [the p(O?) = p(NS?) curve] is observed when P = R/(1− R). Partial 
complementarity that is realty-consistent [p(O?) > p(NS?); right side of graph] is observed 
when P < R/(1− R)), and partial complementarity that is realty-reversed [p(O?) < p(NS?); 
left side of graph] is observed when P > R/(1− R).
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 41
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
(old) items in Panels A and B, respectively. O? refers to old probes, and NS? refers to new-
similar probes. Strong O refers to O items from strong NS data sets, and weak O refers to O 
items from weak NS data sets in Experiment 1. Strong NS performance is completely 
complementary because p(O?) ≈ p(NS?). Weak NS performance is moderately 
complementary and reality-consistent because p(O?) < p(NS?). O performance is weakly 
complementary and reality-consistent because p(O?) > p(NS?).
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 42
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
relations between p(O?) and p(NS?) for NS items and O items in the non-DRM sub-corpus 
of Experiment 1. Performance on NS items is partially complementary and reality-consistent 
because p(O?) < p(NS?). Performance on O items is very weakly complementary and 
reality-consistent because p(O?) > p(NS?).
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 43
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. 
relations between p(O?) and p(NS?) for strong NS items, weak NS items, and O items in 
Experiment 2 (Panel A) and in the immediate testing condition of Experiment 3 (Panel B). 
In both panels, strong NS performance is completely complementary because p(O?) ≈ 
p(NS?), weak NS performance is partially complementary and reality-consistent because 
p(O?) < p(NS?), and O performance is weakly complementary and reality-consistent 
because p(O?) > p(NS?).
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 44
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. 
delayed testing condition of Experiment 3 for items that were previously tested (Panel A) 
and for items that were not previously tested (Panel B). In Panel A, strong NS performance 
is partially complementary and reality-consistent because p(O?) < p(NS?), weak NS 
performance is partially complementary and reality-reversed because p(O?) > p(NS?), and O 
performance is weakly complementary and reality-consistent because p(O?) > p(NS?). In 
Panel B, strong NS performance is partially complementary and reality-consistent because 
p(O?) < p(NS?), weak NS performance is weakly complementary and reality-reversed 
because p(O?) > p(NS?), and O performance is partially complementary and reality-
consistent because p(O?) > p(NS?).
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 45
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. 
control condition of Experiment 5 (Panel A) and in the repetition condition (Panel B). In 
Panel A, strong NS performance is completely complementary, whereas weak NS and O 
performance are both partially complementary and reality-consistent. In Panel B, 
performance for all items is partially complementary and reality-consistent.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 46
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. 
1,500 msec condition of Experiment 6 (Panel A) and in the 500 msec condition (Panel B). In 
Panel A, strong and weak NS performance are completely complementary, whereas O 
performance is partially complementary and reality-consistent. In Panel B, strong NS 
performance is partially complementary and reality-reversed, weak NS performance is 
completely complementary, and O performance is partially complementary and reality-
consistent.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 47
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 8. 
The ability of the target recollection and context recollection parameters (R and P) to predict 
levels of complementarity for new-similar items [p(O?) − p(NS?)] in the corpus of conjoint 
recognition data sets. p(O?) is the probability of accepting new-similar items on old probes, 
and p(NS?) is the probability of accepting them on new-similar probes. Panel A = strong NS 
items (critical distractors) in DRM experiments, Panel B = weak NS items in DRM 
experiments, Panel C = NS items in non-DRM experiments.
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 48
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 49
Table 1
Experimental materials and procedures for the Deese/Roediger/McDermott illusion
Old list words (O)
New-but-similar words (NS)
New-different words (ND)
table, couch, desk, sofa, ...
chair (strong), seat (weak)
city, music
rest, awake, tired, dream, ...
sleep (strong), yawn (weak)
cold, soft
mad, fear. hate, temper, ...
anger (strong), mean (weak)
spider, thief
Note. Subjects study word lists composed of 12–15 related items, such as those in the left hand column, and they respond to a recognition test on 
which three types of test probes are presented: old (O) list words, new-but-similar (NS) words, and new-different (ND) words. For each test probe, 
the subjects’ task is to decide whether it is O.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 50
Table 2
Mean Estimates of the Conjoint Recognition Model’s Parameters for New-Similar Items and Estimates of the 
Proportions of New-Similar Items that Occupy the Two Reality States
Data sub-corpus
DRM Strong
DRM Weak
Non-DRM
Parameter estimates:
 R
.19
.16
.31
 P
.23
.08
.20
 SNS
32
.14
.19
Reality states:
 O
.19
.07
.11
 NS
.19
.16
.31
 Both
.21
.11
.11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Brainerd and Reyna
Page 51
Table 3
Mean Probabilities of Old and New-Similar Judgments on Test 1 and Test 2 for Items for which the Two 
Probes were the Same or Different
Item/probe
Test 1
Test 2
Same probe type (acceptance probabilities)
List items:
 V
.69
.71
 G
.44
.46
Critical distractors:
 V
.47
.52
 G
.58
.59
New-different items
 V
.22
.41
 G
.30
.35
Different probe type (acceptance probabilities)
List items;
 V ➔ G
 G ➔ V
Critical distractors:
 V ➔ G
 G ➔ V
New-different items
 V ➔ G
.21
.38
 G ➔ V
.31
.44
Note. V = probes that ask if the test item is old. G = probes that ask if the test item is new-similar.