Blurring past and present: Using false memory to better 
understand false hearing in young and older adults
Eric Failes, Mitchell S. Sommers, Larry L. Jacoby
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Washington University, 1 Brookings Dr., 
Campus Box 1125, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
Abstract
A number of recent studies have shown that older adults are more susceptible to context-based 
misperceptions in hearing (Rogers et al., 2012; Sommers et al., 2015) than are young adults. One 
explanation for these age-related increases in, what we term, false hearing is that older adults are 
less able than young individuals to inhibit a prepotent response favored by context. A similar 
explanation has been proposed for demonstrations of age-related increases in false memory 
(Jacoby et al., 2005). The present study was designed to compare susceptibility to false hearing 
and false memory in a group of older adults. In Experiment 1, we replicated the findings of past 
studies demonstrating increased frequency of false hearing in older, relative to young, adults. In 
Experiment 2, we demonstrated older adults’ increased susceptibility to false memory in the same 
sample. Importantly, we found that participants who were more prone to false hearing also tended 
to be more prone to false memory, supporting the idea that the two phenomena share a common 
mechanism. The results are discussed within the framework of a capture model, which 
differentiates between context-based responding resulting from failures of cognitive control and 
context-based guessing.
Keywords
false hearing; false memory; speech perception; context effects; aging
Although early conceptualizations of memory and perception considered both to be veridical 
recordings of events and sensations that occurred, it is now clear that these processes are 
influenced by prior knowledge and expectations, and often reflect a reconstruction of the 
experienced events (Alba & Hasher, 1983; Bartlett, 1932; Bugelski & Alampay, 1961). One 
of the most powerful demonstrations of such active reconstruction in both memory and 
perception are cases in which our expectations result in either false memories or false 
Terms of use and reuse: academic research for non-commercial purposes, see here for full terms. http://www.springer.com/gb/open-
access/authors-rights/aam-terms-v1
Contact: Eric Failes, e.failes@wustl.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This Author Accepted Manuscript is a PDF file of a an unedited peer-reviewed manuscript that has been 
accepted for publication but has not been copyedited or corrected. The official version of record that is published in the journal is kept 
up to date and so may therefore differ from this version.
Open Practices Statement
The data and materials for all tasks in this experiment are available at https://osf.io/dtvxy/?
view_only=258f71d332c148ed9741d3ea66fb4bc1. This experiment was not preregistered.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Published in final edited form as:
Mem Cognit. 2020 November ; 48(8): 1403–1416. doi:10.3758/s13421-020-01068-8.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

perceptions - incorrectly remembering or perceiving events based on expectations. The study 
of false memory dates back at least to the publication of Bartlett’s (1932) book 
Remembering, in which he showed that participants’ memory for the Native American folk 
story “The War of the Ghosts” became distorted to more closely resemble their own 
experiences. For example, although the story describes two men hunting seals, participants 
often recalled that the two men were fishing. The history of false perception research 
extends back even further, with hundreds of studies describing visual illusions being 
published before the start of the twentieth century (Coren & Girgus, 1978).
One framework that has been useful for understanding the mechanisms mediating both false 
memory and false perception is the process dissociation framework (Jacoby, 1991). As 
applied to memory and perception, the process dissociation framework posits that individual 
memories and perceptual experiences are determined by both controlled and automatic 
processes. The relative importance of controlled and automatic processes in determining 
perceptual or memorial experiences can be established by having conditions in which the 
two function in concert as well as those in which they are in opposition. For example, 
Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) applied the process dissociation framework to understand 
the mechanisms underlying one type of false memory. In their study, young and older adult 
participants first studied a list of semantically-related cue-target word pairs (e.g., knee - 
bend). Following the study phase, participants were again shown the studied word pairs, but 
in each case, only a fragment of the second word in each pair was shown (e.g., knee - b_n_). 
Participants were tasked with verbally completing the fragment with the word from the study 
phase and judged their confidence in their answer by indicating whether they remembered 
the reported word from the study phase, whether the reported word simply seemed familiar, 
or whether they were guessing. The critical manipulation was that immediately prior to 
viewing the cue-fragment pair, a prime was briefly presented on screen. The prime was 
either the word from the study phase that correctly completed the fragment (congruent 
condition; e.g., bend), an unstudied word that was semantically-related to the cue and could 
complete the fragment (incongruent condition; e.g., bone), or a string of ampersands 
(baseline condition; &&&&&), introducing helpful, misleading, or no bias, respectively. 
Jacoby et al. suggested that successful retrieval of the study phase word indexed controlled 
processing, whereas responses based on the prime indexed automatic processes. In the 
congruent condition, reliance on either controlled or automatic processing would lead to a 
correct response (bend). However, in the incongruent condition, correct responding required 
participants to resist the automatic process (bone) and respond based on controlled 
processing (i.e. retrieval from the study phase).
Although both young and older adults in the study by Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) 
produced false memories (e.g., responding with the prime word bone rather than the studied 
word bend), older adults were more likely to produce such false memories and did so with 
higher confidence. This difference was found despite equating performance in the baseline 
condition for young and older adults by presenting the cue-target pairs for a longer duration 
for older adults in the study phase. Jacoby et al. concluded that the age differences in 
performance in the incongruent condition was due to differences in cognitive control - an 
inability to resist an automatic response - rather than a difference in memory per se. The 
Jacoby et al. results therefore supported previous findings (Hay & Jacoby, 1999; Jacoby, 
Failes et al.
Page 2
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1999; see Jacoby & Rhodes, 2006) suggesting that, relative to young adults, older adults 
have an increased reliance on automatic rather than controlled processing as a basis for 
responding.
Rogers et al. (2012, Experiment 2) conducted an analogous experiment examining the 
relative contributions of automatic and controlled processes to speech perception. 
Participants first studied semantically-related, cue-target word pairs (e.g., barn - hay) 
presented both visually and aurally. Once participants had learned the word pairs, they 
completed a speech perception task in which two words were presented aurally, the first 
word in the clear and the second word in background noise. The word pairs were either the 
same as those learned in the study phase (congruent condition; e.g., barn - hay), a cue from 
the study phase paired with a word differing from the learned target word by a single 
phoneme, known as a phonological neighbor (incongruent condition; e.g., barn - pay), or a 
pair of novel, unrelated words (baseline condition; e.g., cloud - fun). The signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR) for the second word in the pair was set individually such that each participant 
achieved approximately 50% accuracy in the baseline condition. Participants were tasked 
with saying aloud the word they heard in the background noise and judging their confidence 
that they had actually heard the word in noise on a 0–100% scale.
In this case, controlled processes indexed participants’ ability to respond on the basis of 
sensory information (the acoustic signal) and automatic processes indexed their reliance on 
the semantic relationship between the two words. As in the memory experiment by Jacoby et 
al. (2005), using either automatic or controlled processes as a basis for responding would 
lead to a correct response in the congruent condition. However, in the incongruent condition, 
reliance on automatic processes would lead to an incorrect response (e.g., reporting having 
heard hay when pay was actually presented). Rogers et al. (2005) used the term false hearing 
to refer to responses based on context in the incongruent condition that were accompanied 
by high levels of confidence. As expected, baseline performance was approximately 50% in 
both groups, indicating that overall audibility was equated for young and older adults. 
Similar to the Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) findings with regards to false memory, both 
young and older adults experienced false hearing, but older adults were more prone to false 
hearing than were young adults. Additionally, older adults gave higher confidence ratings to 
those incorrect responses than did young adults. Together, these findings indicate an age-
related increase in responding based on automatic rather than controlled processes.
In a follow-up experiment, Sommers et al. (2015, Experiment 2) demonstrated that the 
semantic context provided by natural speech also influences perception of individual words. 
Sommers et al. had young and older adults identify sentence-final words in background 
noise. The target words were either highly predicted by the preceding sentence (congruent 
condition; e.g., The shepherd watched his sheep), a phonological neighbor of the word 
predicted by context (incongruent condition; e.g., The shepherd watched his sheath), or were 
unpredictable from the preceding sentence (baseline condition; e.g., Paul heard they asked 
about the sheep). As in the study by Rogers et al. (2012, Experiment 2), the SNR was set 
individually such that each participant achieved approximately 50% accuracy in the baseline 
condition, and all participants made a 0–100% confidence judgement after identifying each 
target word.
Failes et al.
Page 3
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The results of Sommers et al. (2015, Experiment 2) provided a conceptual replication of 
both Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) and Rogers et al. (2012, Experiment 2). Participants 
correctly identified in excess of 90% of target words in the congruent condition, but 
frequently misheard the target words in the incongruent condition as the contextually 
predicted word (e.g., responding sheep when sheath was actually presented), demonstrating 
the ability of automatic responses - in this case provided by the preceding sentence context - 
to override available sensory information. Furthermore, as in the studies by Jacoby et al. and 
Rogers et al., older adults were more prone to context-based errors and were more confident 
in those errors than were young adults, with older adults reporting maximum confidence in 
cases of false hearing - which the authors referred to as dramatic false hearing - four times as 
frequently as young adults (.16 vs. .04). These findings further supported the idea that older 
adults are more reliant on automatic processes as a basis for responding than are young 
adults. Furthermore, as in the study by Rogers et al., performance in the baseline condition 
was equated between older and young adults by individually setting the SNR, meaning that 
age differences observed in the congruent and incongruent conditions could not be attributed 
to differences in hearing acuity.
In summary, both false memories (Jacoby et al., 2005) and false perceptions (Rogers et al., 
2012; Sommers et al., 2015) can be accounted for within the process dissociation 
framework. Specifically, when automatic and controlled processes are placed in opposition, 
responding based on the former can lead to errors in memory and perception. Furthermore, 
age-related increases in both false memory and false hearing are consistent with greater 
reliance on automatic processing by older compared with young adults (Hay & Jacoby, 
1999; Jennings & Jacoby, 1997). In the present study, we examined whether similar 
mechanisms mediate false memory and false perception by obtaining measures of both 
phenomena within the same individuals. In Experiment 1, we attempted to replicate the 
Sommers et al. (2015) finding of robust levels of false hearing in young and older adults. In 
Experiment 2, we used the memory test from Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) to assess 
susceptibility to false memory in the same group of young and older adults and compared 
this to their susceptibility to false hearing from Experiment 1. Finding that individual 
differences in false memory predict individual differences in false hearing would suggest 
that the two phenomena may, at least in part, arise from mechanisms that are not specific to 
either memory or perception, but instead reflect the operation of more global cognitive 
control mechanisms, which would be critical for developing a unified theory to explain 
context-based errors encompassing both false memory and false perception.
Experiment 1
Materials and Methods
Participants—Participants in this study were 60 young adults (18 male) ages 18 to 23 (M 
= 19.05, SD = 1.05) and 58 community-dwelling older adults (18 male) ages 65 to 81 (M = 
71.17, SD = 4.14). Participants who required glasses or corrective lenses wore them on the 
day of testing, and no participants reported using hearing aids. All participants were native 
English speakers, and completed the Shipley Vocabulary Test (Shipley, 1940). Young adults 
Failes et al.
Page 4
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in our study had significantly poorer vocabulary knowledge (M = 30.83, SD = 3.61) than 
older adults (M = 34.98, SD = 2.98), t(112.80) = −6.79, p < .001.
Stimuli and Materials—Stimuli in the hearing task were 84 high-predictability sentences 
(hereafter referred to as congruent sentences; e.g., She put the toys in the box) and 42 carrier 
sentences (hereafter referred to as baseline sentences; e.g., The word is page) selected from 
the Revised Speech Perception in Noise Test (Bilger et al., 1984) or created by the 
researchers. For each congruent sentence, an incongruent sentence was created by changing 
either the first or last phoneme in the sentence-final target word to form an alternative word 
that was not predicted by the sentence context (e.g., She put the toys in the fox). The length, 
frequency, and phonological neighborhood density of all target words were gathered from 
the English Lexicon Project (Balota et al., 2007). The length of target words in the congruent 
(M = 4.35, SD = .99), incongruent (M = 4.36, SD = 1.05), and baseline conditions (M = 
4.08, SD = .73) did not differ significantly, F(2,197) = 1.35, p > .05. The frequency of target 
words in the congruent (M = 53,839, SD = 120,601.25, incongruent (M = 57,573, SD = 
86,165.11), and baseline conditions (M = 59,267, SD = 115,873.36) also did not differ 
significantly, F(2,197) = .04, p > .05. Finally, the phonological neighborhood density of 
target words in the congruent (M = 19.22, SD = 11.03), incongruent (M = 19.20, SD = 
11.45), and baseline conditions (M = 18.95, SD = 9.73) did not differ significantly, F(2,197) 
= .01, p > .05. All sentences were recorded at 48,000 Hz and 16-bit resolution. Sentences 
were recorded in a double-walled, sound-attenuating booth, and were spoken at a normal 
rate by a male with a Midwestern American accent. All sentences were played at an average 
amplitude of 64 dB SPL.
Procedure—Participants were told that they would hear complete sentences with the final 
word in background noise, and that their task would be to type the word presented in noise. 
The target word (but not the preceding context) in each sentence was embedded in speech 
shaped noise that onset 500 ms prior to the target word and continued for 500 ms after the 
offset of the target word. The SNR was set at −4 dB SPL for all young adults and at +1 dB 
SPL for all older adults, SNRs found to produce approximately 50% accuracy in the baseline 
condition from pilot testing. Participants were explicitly warned that the target words would 
sometimes be predictable based on the context provided by the sentence, but that sometimes 
the sentence context would be misleading, and were provided examples of congruent and 
incongruent sentences. After typing the word they heard in the background noise, 
participants indicated their reason for providing their response by selecting one of three 
options - hear, know, or guess - based on the remember/know paradigm (Tulving, 1985). 
Participants were instructed to select “hear” if they heard the specific sounds of the target 
word when it was presented, so they were certain that the response they typed was the word 
that was presented. They were told to select “know” if they did not hear the specific sounds 
of the target word when it was presented, but still knew that their response was the word that 
was presented. Finally, they were told to select “guess” if they were purely guessing with no 
idea of the correct answer. The descriptions for each of these response types were presented 
on screen each time participants made the hear/know/guess judgement. There was no time 
limit for identification of the target word or for the hear/know/guess judgement.
Failes et al.
Page 5
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Participants completed six practice trials, consisting of two baseline, two congruent, and two 
incongruent sentences, followed by 120 test trials consisting of 40 baseline, 40 congruent, 
and 40 incongruent sentences. It should be noted that the sentence context was only an 
accurate cue for responding in 40 out of 120 total trials (33.33%) and therefore, if anything, 
participants should be biased against using the sentence context as a basis for responding. In 
order to reduce error variance from differences in presentation order, sentences within the 
practice and test blocks were randomized once and this same order was used for all 
participants. Each high-predictability sentence was presented with either the congruent or 
incongruent target word and this was counterbalanced across participants so that congruent 
and incongruent versions of the same sentence were never presented to the same participant. 
A 1000 ms pure tone was presented to signal the start of each new trial.
Statistical Analyses—We conducted mixed logistic regression analyses using the glmer 
function in the lme4 package in R (Bates et al., 2015) to ensure that the context 
manipulations had the predicted effects on accuracy. Level 1 of the model included an 
intercept term corresponding to the odds of an accurate response in the baseline condition 
and two dummy coded variables corresponding to the change in performance from the 
baseline condition to the congruent and incongruent context conditions, each of which was 
allowed to vary randomly across participants. At level 2 of the model, we included a dummy 
coded Group variable (young adults coded 0, older adults coded 1), and the interaction of the 
Group variable with the congruent and incongruent dummy variables from level 1. This 
allowed us to assess the change in the odds of an accurate response from the young adult 
group to the older adult group in the baseline condition, and the difference in the magnitude 
of change between young and older adults from the baseline condition to the congruent and 
incongruent conditions. The dependent variable was trial-by-trial accuracy. Fixed effect 
estimates were converted to odds in the presented tables to facilitate interpretation.
Susceptibility to false hearing was assessed using a second mixed logistic regression model. 
This model included only an intercept and Group, allowing us to assess differences in 
susceptibility to false hearing across groups. We then conducted a mixed effects multinomial 
regression model using the brm function from the brms package in R (Bürkner, 2017) to 
assess the relative odds of judging a false hearing experience as heard relative to known or 
guessed. The data used in this model was a subset of data that included only cases of false 
hearing in the incongruent condition. The model included an intercept term and Group as 
predictors, and the intercept term was allowed to vary randomly across subjects. False 
hearing responses classified as heard were used as the reference condition, allowing us to 
assess the relative odds of classifying a response as heard relative to known or guessed, and 
whether this differed across age groups. Fixed effect estimates (output as logits) were 
exponentiated to yield an odds ratio to facilitate interpretation. Since the brms package does 
not calculate p-values, we will report the 95% confidence intervals (CI) around the 
exponentiated fixed effect estimates. A 95% CI that does not include 1 can be interpreted as 
a significant effect at the α = .05 level.
Failes et al.
Page 6
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Results
Accuracy—The proportion of accurate responses in each condition of the hearing task are 
presented in Figure 1. Trends in the hearing task are consistent with those of Rogers et al. 
(2012, Experiment 2). While participants achieved accuracy between 50% and 70% on 
average in the baseline condition, they demonstrated nearly perfect performance when the 
target word was preceded by a congruent semantic context. On the other hand, performance 
suffered when the target word was preceded by an incongruent semantic context. The mixed 
logistic regression model confirmed these trends (Table 1). First, it is important to note that 
the groups differed in the baseline condition, with the odds of an older adult accurately 
identifying the target word being 1.35 times greater than young adults (z = 1.35, p < .05). 
This was surprising given that we used SNRs identified in a pilot study to equate the age 
groups in baseline performance. One potential consequence of the inequality between 
groups in the baseline condition is that older adults may have a more limited ability to 
benefit from congruent context due to their elevated baseline performance. However, our 
data suggest that this was not the case. Whereas we found that the odds of correctly 
identifying the target word was more than 8.34 times greater in the congruent condition than 
in the baseline condition for young adults (z = 16.59, p < .001), older adults actually 
experienced greater benefit from congruent context (z = 2.90, p < .01). Similarly, whereas 
the odds of correctly identifying the target word in the incongruent condition for young 
adults was 2.35 times worse than in the baseline condition (z = −7.93, p < .001), older adults 
experienced an even greater detriment to performance (z = −2.28, p < .05). Thus, despite 
older adults being more likely than young adults to accurately identify the target word in the 
baseline condition, older adults were influenced by available contextual cues to a greater 
degree than were young adults.
False Hearing—We next investigated group differences in susceptibility to false hearing in 
incongruent trials of the hearing task. We found that both young and older adults frequently 
reported hearing the contextually predicted word in the incongruent condition (see Figure 1). 
Additionally, as shown in Table 2, the odds that an older adult would experience false 
hearing was 1.41 times greater than for a young adult, which was significant (z = 1.95, p 
= .05). Thus, we replicated the findings of past studies that older adults are more susceptible 
to false hearing than young adults (Rogers et al., 2012; Sommers et al., 2015).
Subjective Experience of False Hearing—Finally, we investigated the likelihood of 
experiencing false hearing rated as heard, known, or guessed across groups. As shown in 
Figure 2, both young and older adults frequently (and incorrectly) judged that they had heard 
the contextually predicted word in the incongruent condition when a similar sounding but 
unpredicted word was, in fact, presented. Young adults were more likely to judge cases of 
false hearing as heard than known (OR = .43, 95% CI = .32 – .58) or guessed (OR = .05, 
95% CI = .03 – .08). The difference in the odds of judging cases of false hearing as heard 
relative to known was even greater in older adults (OR = .47, 95% CI = .30 – .72), but the 
difference in the odds of judging cases of false hearing as heard relative to guessed did not 
differ significantly across groups (OR = 1.02, 95% CI = .54 – 2.03).
Failes et al.
Page 7
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Experiment 1 Discussion
Taken together, the results of Experiment 1 look quite similar to those in the studies by 
Rogers et al. (2012, Experiment 2) and Sommers et al. (2015, Experiment 2). In all cases, 
accuracy was modulated by the validity of contextual cues, with the highest accuracy when 
contextual cues were valid predictors of the sentence final word (congruent condition), 
followed by when there were no contextual cues (baseline condition), and then by when 
contextual cues were misleading (incongruent condition). Importantly, we also replicated the 
finding of increased susceptibility to false hearing exhibited by older, relative to young, 
adults observed in past studies. This finding was particularly remarkable given that older 
adults exhibited improved audibility of the target word relative to young adults in the 
baseline condition. Thus, older adults were more likely to use context as a basis for 
responding than young adults even when the auditory stimulus was easier to discern for 
older adults. This further supports the idea that older adults are over-reliant on contextual 
cues in speech perception, such that they continue to use contextual cues even when they are 
not valid.
A novel contribution of Experiment 1 was assessing the subjective experience of false 
hearing through hear/know/guess judgements. We found that both young and older adults 
were more likely to judge cases of false hearing as heard as opposed to either known or 
guessed. Additionally, older adults were more likely to judge cases of false hearing as heard 
as opposed to known than were young adults. These findings mirror those in false memory, 
where older adults have been shown to be more likely to judge their false memories as 
“remembered” than young adults (Jacoby et al., 2005, Experiment 2).
Experiment 2
Having established robust rates of false hearing in our group of older adults, we next sought 
to determine whether this over-reliance on context would transfer to a task in a completely 
different domain: memory. We employed the same memory task that was used by Jacoby et 
al. (2005, Experiment 2) described above, which produced high rates of false memory in 
older adults.
In Experiment 2, we first sought to determine whether memory accuracy was affected by 
valid, neutral, and misleading contextual cues in a similar way as in the hearing task in 
Experiment 1. We expected that participants’ memory would be best when cued with a valid 
prime, followed by neutral primes, and then by misleading primes. Based on the findings of 
Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2), we expected that participants would frequently 
experience false memories when primes were misleading, and that participants - particularly 
older adults - would often judge their false memories as remembered. Most importantly, we 
predicted that older adults who were more susceptible to false hearing in Experiment 1 
would be more susceptible to false memory in Experiment 2. This would suggest that false 
hearing and false memory may share a common cognitive mechanism, as opposed to being 
driven by separate, domain-specific mechanisms.
Failes et al.
Page 8
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Materials and Methods
Participants—Participants were the same 60 young adults and 58 community-dwelling 
older adults from Experiment 1. Participants completed Experiments 1 and 2 during separate 
1-hour sessions on different days.
Stimuli and Materials—Participants completed two phases in this task, a study phase and 
a test phase. Stimuli in the study phase were 99 semantically related cue-target word pairs 
(e.g., head - skull). Cue words ranged from three to nine letters in length (M = 5.08, SD = 
1.41), and target words ranged from three to seven letters in length (M = 4.59, SD = .79). 
Stimuli in the test phase consisted of the same cues from the study phase matched with a 
fragment of its paired target created by replacing certain letters with dashes (e.g., head - s--
l-). Target words in the test phase had between one and five letters replaced by dashes (M = 
2.21, SD = .71), and retained between one and four letters (M = 2.38, SD = .63), although all 
but one fragment (-u- for the target word “mug”) retained at least two letters. The primes in 
the test phase were either the target word from the study phase (congruent condition; e.g., 
skull), an alternative word that could complete the target fragment and that was semantically 
related to the cue (incongruent condition; e.g., scalp), or a string of five ampersands 
(&&&&&), which provided no predictive value for the fragment completion task (baseline 
condition). There were no differences in target word length between the congruent (M = 
4.57, SD = .73), incongruent (M = 4.47, SD = .78), and baseline conditions (M = 4.73, SD 
= .87), F(2,87) = .87, p > .05. We obtained the log frequencies for targets in the congruent 
(M = 9.37, SD = 2.01), incongruent (M = 9.67, SD = 1.55), and baseline conditions (M = 
9.29, SD = 1.74) from the English Lexicon Project (Balota et al., 2007), and found that there 
were no differences in target word frequency across conditions, F(2,87) = .38, p > .05).
Procedure—Participants were told to study a list of semantically related word pairs for a 
later memory test. They were shown six cue-target word pairs as examples. Following the 
examples, participants completed the study phase, in which 90 cue-target word pairs were 
presented. An additional three cue-target word pairs were presented following the study 
phase to act as a buffer against the recency effect. For young adults, each word pair was 
presented for 1000 ms, whereas each word pair was presented for 3000 ms for older adults, a 
manipulation used by Jacoby et al. (2005) to equate memory for words in the baseline 
condition. An interstimulus interval (ISI) of 500 ms separated each cue-target word pair. All 
stimuli in the study phase were presented in a pre-determined random order and this order 
was used for all participants, and each cue-target word pair was presented only once.
To equate the interval from the first word in the study phase to the last word in the buffer 
trials, young adults waited 186 seconds before starting the memory test, whereas older adults 
started the memory test immediately following the buffer trials. In the memory test, 
participants were again shown the word pairs from the learning phase, but in each case the 
second word in the pair was fragmented by substituting dashes for some of the letters. 
Participants were instructed that their job was to complete the word fragment by typing the 
word that accurately completed the learned word pair from the study phase. Before each 
cue-fragment pair was presented, a congruent, incongruent, or baseline prime was flashed on 
screen. Participants were explicitly warned at the start of the study that primes would appear, 
Failes et al.
Page 9
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

and were told that the prime would either be the target word from the study phase, in which 
case they should use this word to complete the word fragment, an unstudied word that was 
semantically related to the presented cue and that could complete the word fragment, in 
which case they should not use this word to complete the word fragment, or a string of 
ampersands. The prime remained on screen for 500 ms and offset 500 ms before 
presentation of the fragmented target word. Participants completed 30 trials in each of the 
three prime conditions (congruent, baseline, and incongruent), and trials were presented in a 
pre-determined random order. It should be noted that the prime was only an accurate cue for 
memory in 30 out of 90 total trials (33.33%) and therefore, if anything, participants should 
be biased against using the prime as a basis for responding.
After typing the word that completed each cue-target word pair, participants indicated their 
reason for providing their response by selecting one of three options: remember, know, or 
guess (Tulving, 1985). Participants were told to select “remember” if they recalled specific 
details of the word’s presentation in the study list, so they were certain that their response 
was the word from the study list. They were told to select “know” if they knew that they had 
studied the word they typed, but could not recall specific details about studying it. Finally, 
they were told to select “guess” if they were purely guessing with no idea of the correct 
answer. The descriptions for each these response types were presented on screen each time 
participants made the remember/know/guess judgement.
Statistical Analyses—Statistical analyses were identical to Experiment 1, predicting 
accurate responses, susceptibility to false memory in general, and susceptibility to false 
memories judged as remembered, known, or guessed. In addition to these analyses, we 
compared susceptibility to false memory to susceptibility to false hearing from Experiment 
1. For this analysis, we created a mixed effects logistic regression predicting trial-by-trial 
false hearing from Experiment 1. We included each participant’s z-scored average 
susceptibility to false memory from Experiment 2 and Group as predictors, as well as the 
interaction between susceptibility to false memory and Group. As in the other models 
conducted in this experiment, the intercept term was allowed to vary randomly across 
subjects.
Results
Accuracy—The proportion of accurate responses in each condition of the memory task are 
shown in Figure 3. Our data replicate those of Jacoby et al. (2005), with congruent primes 
improving memory accuracy relative to baseline primes, and incongruent primes decreasing 
accuracy relative to baseline primes. These trends were confirmed by our mixed logistic 
regression model (see Table 3). As in the hearing task in Experiment 1, performance in the 
age groups was not equated in the baseline condition. The odds of an accurate response in 
the baseline condition were 1.52 times greater for older adults than young adults (z = 4.05, p 
< .001). The inequality in the baseline condition was surprising given that we used the exact 
same task as that used by Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2), where young and older adults 
achieved equivalent performance in the baseline condition. Despite the inequality in the 
baseline condition, we again observed that the performance of older adult participants was 
impacted to a greater degree by context than was that of young adults. When the word 
Failes et al.
Page 10
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

fragment was preceded by a congruent prime, the odds that young adults would correctly 
complete the word fragment increased by a factor of 4.90 relative to the baseline condition 
(z = 11.61, p < .001). However, when the prime was misleading (i.e., in the incongruent 
condition), the odds that young adults would correctly complete the word fragment 
decreased by a factor of 1.93 relative to the baseline condition (z = −5.67, p < .001). The 
differences between the baseline condition and both the congruent (OR = 1.63, z = 2.36, p 
< .05) and incongruent conditions (OR = .40, z = −5.32, p < .001) was greater in older, 
relative to young, adults. Thus, as in the hearing task in Experiment 1, accuracy in the 
memory task was modulated by the validity of available contextual cues, in this case, the 
primes.
False Memory—We next compared the likelihood of participants incorrectly completing 
the word fragment with the incongruent prime word (i.e., experiencing a false memory) 
across age groups (Table 4). We found that the odds that older adults would experience a 
false memory was 1.64 times greater than for young adults (z = 2.47, p < .05). This 
replicates the findings of Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2), who reported that older adults 
were more likely to falsely remember having studied the prime word in the incongruent 
condition than young adults.
Subjective Experience of False Memory—We next investigated the likelihood of 
experiencing false memories rated as remembered, known, or guessed across groups. As 
shown in Figure 4, both young and older adults frequently judged cases of false memory as 
remembered. However, unlike for false hearing in Experiment 1, young adults were not more 
likely to judge cases of false memory as remembered than either known (OR = 1.17, 95% CI 
= .73 – 1.86) or guessed (OR = 1.36, 95% CI = .85 – 2.21). The difference in the odds of 
judging cases of false memory as remembered relative to known was not different in older 
adults than in young adults (OR = .52, 95% CI = .27 – 1.00). However, the difference in the 
odds of judging cases of false memory as remembered relative to guessed was greater in 
older adults (OR = .19, 95% CI = .09 – .37). In fact, whereas young adults were non-
significantly more likely to judge their false memories as guessed than remembered, older 
adults displayed the opposite pattern.
Relationship between False Memory and False Hearing—Our final set of analyses 
sought to answer the question of whether performance on the memory task could be used to 
predict performance on the hearing task from Experiment 1. We first conducted a basic 
Pearson’s product moment correlation between average susceptibility to false hearing and 
average susceptibility to false memory on incongruent trials of the hearing and memory 
tasks, respectively (see Figure 5). The correlation was significant (r = .39, p < .001), 
indicating that participants who were more susceptible to false hearing also tended to be 
more susceptible to false memory.
The results of the mixed-effect logistic regression model supported the same relationship. 
We found that the interaction between susceptibility to false memory and Group was non-
significant (OR = 1.20, z = .99, p > .05), so we removed it from the model since it may 
obscure the main effects of false memory and Group. In the updated model (see Table 5), a 
one standard deviation increase in susceptibility to false memory increased the odds of 
Failes et al.
Page 11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

experiencing false hearing by a factor of 1.45, which was significant (z = 4.34, p < .001). 
Thus, participants who were more susceptible to false memory also tended to be more 
susceptible to false hearing, and this relationship did not differ across age groups.
Experiment 2 Discussion
In all, the results of Experiment 2 replicated those of Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2), 
showing that both young and older adults employ available contextual cues as a basis for 
responding in the memory task. Additionally, as in the hearing task in Experiment 1, older 
adults - and, to a lesser degree, young adults - continued to use contextual cues even when 
context was misleading, resulting in high rates of false memory. Thus, older adults were 
overly reliant on contextual cues in both hearing and memory.
Similarly to false hearing in Experiment 1, older adults were more likely to judge their false 
memories as remembered relative to known or guessed. Unlike in Experiment 1, however, 
young adults’ subjective experience was better tuned to the accuracy of their response, as 
they were non-significantly more likely to judge false memories as guessed as opposed to 
remembered or known. This suggests that young adults had better metacognition regarding 
the accuracy of their false memory responses than their false hearing responses.
Importantly, older adults’ susceptibility to false memory in Experiment 2 was predictive of 
their susceptibility to false hearing in Experiment 1. Participants who were more susceptible 
to false hearing in Experiment 1 also tended to be more susceptible to false memory in 
Experiment 2. These findings suggest that the ability to resist misleading contextual cues in 
speech perception and in memory may rely, at least in part, on a common cognitive 
mechanism as opposed to separate, domain-specific mechanisms.
It is notable that there was no significant age difference in the magnitude of the relationship 
between false hearing and false memory, as indicated by the non-significant interaction 
between age group and average susceptibility to false memory predicting trial-by-trial false 
hearing. One explanation for this lack of age differences is that our study may simply have 
been underpowered to detect age group differences in the magnitude of the relationship 
between false hearing and false memory. Indeed, looking at the raw correlations between 
false hearing and false memory revealed a larger correlation in older adults (r = .44, p 
< .001) than in young adults (r = .21, p =.11). This suggests that the relationship between 
false hearing and false memory may have been greater in older, relative to young, adults. 
Additionally, age differences in the magnitude of the relationship between false hearing and 
false memory may have been mitigated by unequal performance between groups in the 
baseline condition of both the hearing and memory tasks. Since older adults were better able 
to identify the target word in the absence of contextual cues than were young adults, they 
may have had less need to rely on context as a basis for responding relative to if their 
performance in the baseline condition had been equal to that of the young adult group. This 
would diminish the positive relationship between age and reliance on context as a basis for 
responding reported in past studies (Rogers et al., 2012; Sommers et al., 2015), which could, 
in turn, mitigate age differences in the magnitude of the correlation between false hearing 
and false memory. Future studies should test whether age groups differ in the magnitude of 
Failes et al.
Page 12
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the relationship between false hearing and false memory with a larger sample size and with 
age groups equated in baseline performance to determine whether this effect emerges.
General Discussion
In the present study, we compared young and older adults’ performance on a hearing task 
and a memory task to determine whether susceptibility to false hearing was correlated with 
susceptibility to false memory. We were able to successfully replicate the findings of 
Sommers et al. (2015, Experiment 2) and Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) using their 
respective hearing and memory tasks. In both tasks, adding predictive context significantly 
improved performance relative to when no context was present, supporting the findings of 
past studies showing that older adults are able to use available contextual cues to support 
memory (Jacoby, 1999; Jacoby et al., 2005, Experiment 2) and hearing (Dubno et al. , 2000; 
Hutchinson, 1989; Rogers et al., 2012, Experiment 2; Sommers et al., 2015, Experiment 2). 
However, introducing misleading context was detrimental to performance relative to 
baseline, with participants often providing the contextually predicted response, leading to 
robust rates of both false hearing and false memory. Importantly, we found that participants 
who were more prone to false hearing also tended to be more prone to false memory. This 
finding supports the idea that false hearing and false memory share at least one common 
underlying mechanism.
As noted above, the process dissociation framework (Jacoby, 1991) provides a platform for 
understanding how the distinct tasks used to elicit false hearing and false memories may 
engage similar underlying mechanisms. Specifically, the process dissociation framework 
provides a method for establishing the independent contributions of controlled and 
automatic processes to memory and speech perception. Our findings suggest that 
susceptibility to both false hearing and false memory stems primarily from an overreliance 
on automatic processes, resulting in an inability to resist a prepotent, but inaccurate, 
response. On incongruent trials of the hearing task, participants had to resist a response 
option that was made highly salient by the preceding sentence context and listen closely to 
the presented target word in order to give the unpredicted, but correct, response. Similarly, 
on incongruent trials of the memory task, an unstudied word that could complete the 
fragment was presented as a prime before the fragment completion task, making it a highly 
salient response option. To correctly complete the fragment, participants had to resist the 
salient, but false, prime and engage in conscious recollection to remember the studied word 
that completed the word pair. Therefore, a failure to resist a salient, automatic response is 
one possible mechanism to explain the correlation between false hearing and false memory 
observed in our study.
One model that has been used to explain age-related increases in automatic processes as a 
basis for responding is the capture model (Jacoby et al., 2005; see also Millar et al., 2018). 
According to this model, false memories can arise from two different processes. First, 
participants may be “captured” by the available contextual cues, leading them to provide the 
context-based response without attempting to recollect the studied target word. Second, false 
memories can occur when the individual is not captured by context, but their attempt at 
recollecting the studied target word fails. In this second scenario, the individual may provide 
Failes et al.
Page 13
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the contextually predicted response because it is an easily accessible and plausible response 
option. Jacoby et al. found that the capture model - which included parameters for capture, 
recollection, accessibility bias (i.e., the probability of generating the prime in the memory 
task when attempts at recollection failed), and word generation (i.e., the probability of 
generating the pre-selected alternative word in the memory task) - provided a better fit to 
their data than a model that only included parameters for recollection, accessibility bias, and 
word generation. This suggests that automatic capture by the prime made an important 
contribution to responding in their memory task. This was especially true for older adults in 
their sample, who were more prone to capture than young adults. In fact, the authors found 
that young and older adults differed only in the capture parameter, and did not differ in 
recollection, accessibility bias, or word generation. More recently, however, Millar et al. 
(2018) found that age differences in the same memory task were best explained by a model 
that accounted for both older adults’ increased susceptibility to capture and decreased 
likelihood of recollecting the target word relative to young adults, with no age differences in 
accessibility bias or word generation.
Importantly, the recollection parameter in the studies by Jacoby et al. (2005, Experiment 2) 
and Millar et al. (2018) reported above corresponded to performance in the baseline 
condition of the memory task: Answering correctly in the baseline condition required 
participants to remember the target word without the influence of contextual cues. As was 
true of the recollection parameter, age groups did not differ in the baseline condition of the 
study by Jacoby et al., whereas older adults displayed poorer performance than young adults 
in the baseline condition of the study by Millar et al.. In the present study, it is interesting to 
note that older adults were more likely to experience false hearing and false memory than 
young adults despite having higher baseline accuracy in both tasks (i.e., being better able to 
hear and recollect the target words). This lends further support to the idea that age-related 
declines in cognitive control - as opposed to declines in hearing or memory per se - gave rise 
to older adults’ increased susceptibility to false hearing and false memory in the present 
study.
Although the capture model has not been tested with regards to false hearing, the same 
parameters that were used successfully to explain false memory can also be applied to the 
false hearing paradigm. When the preceding sentence context is highly predictive of a 
sentence-final word in noise, individuals may be captured by the context, leading 
participants to report hearing the word predicted by context without attending to the target 
word itself. As was the case with false memory, false hearing can also occur when 
individuals are unable to identify the target word (in this case because of the presence of 
noise), leading them to provide the contextually predicted response due to its accessibility 
and plausibility. The fit of the capture model to false hearing should be tested in future 
studies, as it may help to dissociate between automatic capture by context and context-based 
guessing, and may provide a framework for understanding older adults’ increased 
susceptibility to false hearing relative to young adults. Additionally, fitting the capture model 
to hearing data may help to distinguish between age-related deficits in cognitive control and 
sensation, just as it has been useful for distinguishing between age-related deficits in 
cognitive control and memory per se (Jacoby et al., 2005; Millar et al., 2018). Finding that 
age-related deficits in cognitive control contribute to errors in hearing would motivate 
Failes et al.
Page 14
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

development of cognitive interventions to supplement sensory interventions (e.g., hearing 
aids) when treating hearing loss, which could improve speech perception outcomes for older 
adults.
The idea that false memory and false hearing can occur when the individual is captured by 
available contextual cues is similar to a prevalent theory that false memories result, in part, 
from failures to inhibit a prepotent response (see Balota et al., 1999). According to this 
theory, contextually predicted, but unpresented, words or events can become activated due to 
their association with actually presented words or contextual cues, which can lead 
participants to falsely remember that the unpresented word or event had been present in the 
studied material. Within this framework, inhibitory control is thought to be required to 
suppress activation of words or events that become activated due to spreading activation 
rather than from their presence in the studied information. Since inhibitory control is thought 
to be needed to suppress a prepotent response, it is possible that poor inhibitory control 
increases the likelihood of being captured by misleading contextual cues. Thus, individual 
differences in inhibitory control could account for differences in susceptibility to both false 
memory and false hearing. Differences in inhibitory control could also account for older 
adults’ greater susceptibility to both false memory (Jacoby et al., 2005) and false hearing 
(Rogers et al., 2012; Sommers et al., 2015) relative to young adults, as older adults have 
been found to exhibit poorer inhibitory control than young adults (Cohn et al., 1984; Hasher 
et al., 1997; Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Sommers & Huff, 2003).
In support of the role of inhibitory control in false memory, two studies (Colombel et al., 
2016; Sommers & Huff, 2003) have shown that poor inhibitory control is related to 
increased susceptibility to associative false memories in the Deese/Roediger-McDermott 
(DRM) paradigm (Deese, 1959; Roediger & McDermott, 1995). Sommers and Huff (2003, 
Experiment 2), for example, showed that poor inhibitory control - as measured by an 
auditory Stroop task - was related to increased susceptibility to both false recall and false 
recognition in a DRM paradigm using phonologically-related word lists. Additionally, 
several studies have found that age-related differences in executive functioning - a set of 
cognitive processes including inhibitory control that regulate planning and goal-directed 
behavior (see Wheeler et al., 1997) - accounts for age-differences in susceptibility to false 
memory, such that age-differences in false memory are reduced or disappear when 
comparing older adults with high executive functioning to young adults (Butler et al., 2004; 
McCabe et al., 2009; Roediger & Geraci, 2007).
The idea that both false hearing and false memory may result from failures of inhibitory 
control can help to explain why participants often reported the subjective experience of 
“hearing” or “remembering” in cases of false hearing and false memory in our study. If it is 
the case that false hearing and false memory can occur when a response option becomes 
highly activated due to preceding context, it is plausible that the subjective experience in 
these cases may be similar to that of veridical hearing or memory. In our hearing task, there 
are two sources of information upon which to base a response: context and the sensory 
signal. If one’s perceptual experience is determined by whatever response gains the most 
activation, as would be argued by models of speech perception such as the Neighborhood 
Activation Model (Luce & Pisoni, 1998), then the source of the activation - context or 
Failes et al.
Page 15
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

sensory information - should not matter when it comes to the perceptual experience. 
Similarly, in memory, one’s subjective memory can be determined by the degree of 
activation from context relative to that of the original memory trace. Thus, in cases where 
participants reported the experience of hearing or remembering in cases of false hearing and 
false memory, it may be the case that the activation provided by context exceeded that of the 
sensory signal or memory trace.
It is clear from our data, however, that cases of false hearing and false memory are not 
always accompanied by the subjective experience of hearing or remembering. In the case of 
false memory in particular, participants frequently characterized their responses as either 
known or guessed. This would be expected based on the explanation of false memory 
provided by the capture model proposed by Jacoby et al. (2005). As described above, false 
memory - and, we argue, false hearing - can result either from being captured by context or 
from context-based guessing. Jacoby et al. argued that whereas cases of false memory 
resulting from capture would be characterized as remembered or known, cases of false 
memory that do not result from capture would be more likely to be characterized as guesses.
Based upon this explanation, both false hearing and false memory in our study were more 
likely to result from capture than context-based guessing, evidenced by the proportion of 
responses characterized as heard/remembered or known relative to guessed. However, our 
findings suggest that a greater proportion of cases of false hearing (see Figure 2) resulted 
from capture than false memory (see Figure 4). This was likely due to differences in the 
strength of contextual cues in the hearing and memory tasks. In the hearing task, context was 
provided by highly predictive sentences, whereas in the memory task, context was a single 
prime word. Therefore, we suggest that the likelihood of being captured by context is 
determined in part by the predictive strength of available contextual cues. Future studies 
should investigate the relationship between predictive strength and subjective experience in 
false hearing and false memory.
Conclusions
Previous studies (Jacoby et al., 2012; Rogers et al., 2012) have suggested that false hearing 
and false memory result from a common mechanism. The present study is the first to explore 
this hypothesis directly by comparing rates of false hearing to those of false memory in 
young and older adults. We found that participants who were more prone to false hearing 
were also more prone to false memory, supporting the idea that the two phenomena share at 
least one common mechanism. As in past studies (Jacoby et al., 2012; Rogers et al., 2012), 
we suggested that the mechanism underlying both false hearing and false memory is a deficit 
in inhibitory control, leading participants to respond based on available context, even when 
the context is misleading. In support of this hypothesis, we drew upon the capture model 
proposed by Jacoby et al. (2005) and described its compatibility with the patterns observed 
in our study, both in terms of response accuracy and subjective experience.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the hard work of the research assistants in the Speech & Hearing lab at Washington 
University in St. Louis - Adam Isaacs, Aryn Lyke, Audrey Ulfers, Davis Holmes, Forrest Whiting, and Zi’Onay 
Walker - who aided in data collection.
Failes et al.
Page 16
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Funding
This project was funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [1 R21AG041958-01A1].
References
Alba JW, & Hasher L (1983). Is memory schematic? Psychological Bulletin, 93, 203–231. 
10.1037/0033-2909.93.2.203
Balota DA, Cortese MJ, Duchek JM, Adams D, Roediger HL III, McDermott KB, & Yerys BE (1999). 
Veridical and false memories in healthy older adults and in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type. 
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 16, 361–384. 10.1080/026432999380834
Balota DA, Yap MJ, Cortese MJ, Hutchison KA, Kessler B, Loftis B, Neely JH, Nelson DL, Simpson 
GB, & Treiman R (2007). The English Lexicon Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445–459. 
10.3758/BF03193014 [PubMed: 17958156] 
Bartlett FC (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press.
Bates D, Maechler M, Bolker B, Walker S (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. 
Journal of Statistical Software, 67, 1–48. 10.18637/jss.v067.i01
Bilger RC, Nuetzel JM, Rabinowitz WM, & Rzeczkowski C (1984). Standardization of a test of speech 
perception in noise. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 27, 32–48. 10.1121/1.2017541 
[PubMed: 6717005] 
Bugelski BR, & Alampay DA (1961). The role of frequency in developing perceptual sets. Canadian 
Journal of Psychology, 15, 205–211. 10.1037/h0083443 [PubMed: 13874512] 
Bürkner P (2017). brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan. Journal of 
Statistical Software, 80, 1–28. 10.18637/jss.v080.i01
Butler KM, McDaniel MA, Dornburg CC, Price AL, & Roediger HL III (2004). Age differences in 
veridical and false recall are not inevitable: The role of frontal lobe function. Psychonomic Bulletin 
& Review, 11, 921–925. 10.3758/BF03196722 [PubMed: 15732704] 
Cohn NB, Dustman RE, & Bradford DC (1984). Age-related decrements in Stroop Color Test 
performance. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 40, 1244–1250. 
10.1002/1097-4679(198409)40:5<1244::AID-JCLP2270400521>3.0.CO;2-D [PubMed: 6490922] 
Colombel F, Tessoulin M, Gilet A-L, & Corson Y (2016). False memories and normal aging: Links 
between inhibitory capacities and monitoring processes. Psychology and Aging, 31, 239–248. 
10.1037/pag0000086 [PubMed: 27111523] 
Coren S, & Girgus JS (1978). Seeing is deceiving: The psychology of visual illusions. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Deese J (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 17–22. 10.1037/h0046671 [PubMed: 13664879] 
Dubno JR, Ahlstrom JB, Horwitz AR (2000). Use of context by young and aged adults with normal 
hearing. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 538–546. 10.1121/1.428322 [PubMed: 
10641662] 
Hasher L, Quig MB, & May CP (1997). Inhibitory control over no-longer relevant information: Adult 
age differences. Memory & Cognition, 25, 286–295. 10.3758/BF03211284
Hasher L, & Zacks RT (1988). Working memory, comprehension, and aging: A review and a new view. 
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 22, 193–225. 10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60041-9
Hay JF, & Jacoby LL (1999). Separating habit and recollection in young and older adults: Effects of 
elaborative processing and distinctiveness. Psychology and Aging, 14, 122–134. 
10.1037/0882-7974.14.1.122 [PubMed: 10224637] 
Hutchinson KM (1989). Influence of sentence context on speech perception in young and older adults. 
Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 44, 36–44. 10.1093/geronj/44.2.p36
Jacoby LL (1991). A process dissociation framework: Separating automatic from intentional uses of 
memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513–541. 10.1016/0749-596X(91)90025-F
Jacoby LL (1999). Deceiving the elderly: Effects of accessibility bias in cued-recall performance. 
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 16, 417–436. 10.1080/026432999380861
Failes et al.
Page 17
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Jacoby LL, Bishara AJ, Hessels S, & Toth JP (2005). Aging, subjective experience, and cognitive 
control: Dramatic false remembering by older adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 134, 131–148. 10.1037/0096-3445.134.2.131 [PubMed: 15869342] 
Jacoby LL, & Rhodes MG (2006). False remembering in the aged. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 15, 49–53. 10.1111/j.0963-7214.2006.00405.x
Jacoby LL, Rogers CS, Bishara AJ, & Shimizu Y (2012). Mistaking the recent past for the present: 
False seeing by older adults. Psychology and Aging, 27, 22–32. 10.1037/a0025924 [PubMed: 
22023508] 
Jennings JM, & Jacoby LL (1997). An opposition procedure for detecting age-related deficits in 
recollection: Telling effects of repetition. Psychology and Aging, 12, 352–361. 
10.1037/0882-7974.12.2.352 [PubMed: 9189995] 
Luce PA, & Pisoni DB (1998). Recognizing spoken words: The Neighborhood Activation Model. Ear 
Hear, 19, 1–36. 10.1097/00003446-199802000-00001 [PubMed: 9504270] 
McCabe DP, Roediger HL III, McDaniel MA, & Balota DA (2009). Aging reduces veridical 
remembering but increases false remembering: Neuropsychological test correlates of remember-
know judgments. Neuropsychologia, 47, 2164–2173. 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.11.025 
[PubMed: 19100756] 
Millar PR, Balota DA, Bishara AJ, & Jacoby LL (2018). Multinomial models reveal deficits of two 
distinct controlled retrieval processes in aging and very mild Alzheimer disease. Memory & 
Cognition, 46, 1058–1075. 10.3758/s13421-018-0821-9 [PubMed: 29796864] 
Roediger HL III, & Geraci L (2007). Aging and the misinformation effect: A neuropsychological 
analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33, 321–334. 
10.1037/0278-7393.33.2.321
Roediger HL III, & McDermott KB (1995). Creating false memories: Remembering words not 
presented in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 
803–814. 10.1037/0278-7393.21.4.803
Rogers CS, Jacoby LL, Sommers MS (2012). Frequent false hearing by older adults: The role of age 
differences in metacognition. Psychology and Aging, 27, 33–45. 10.1037/a0026231 [PubMed: 
22149253] 
Shipley WC (1940). A self-administering scale for measuring intellectual impairment and 
deterioration. The Journal of Psychology, 9, 371–377. 10.1080/00223980.1940.9917704
Sommers MS, & Huff LM (2003). The effects of age and dementia of the Alzheimer’s type on 
phonological false memories. Psychology and Aging, 18, 791–806. 10.1037/0882-7974.18.4.791 
[PubMed: 14692865] 
Sommers MS, Morton J, & Rogers C (2015). You are not listening to what I said: False hearing in 
young and older adults In Lindsay DS, Kelley CM, Yonelinas AP, & Roediger HL III (Eds), 
Remembering: Attributions, Processes, and Control in Human Memory (essays in Honor of Larry 
Jacoby) (pp. 269–284). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Tulving E (1985). Memory and consciousness. Canadian Psychology, 26, 1–12. 10.1037/h0080017
Wheeler MA, Stuss DT, & Tulving E (1997). Toward a theory of episodic memory: The frontal lobes 
and autonoetic consciousness. Psychological Bulletin, 121, 331–354. 
10.1037/0033-2909.121.3.331 [PubMed: 9136640] 
Failes et al.
Page 18
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
Mean proportion of correct responses (hits) across possible response types and cases of false 
hearing (FH) in the hearing task. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Failes et al.
Page 19
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
Proportion of false hearing responses on incongruent trials rated as hear, know, or guess. 
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Failes et al.
Page 20
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
Mean proportion of correct responses (hits) across possible response types and cases of false 
memory (FM) in the memory task. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Failes et al.
Page 21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. 
Proportion of false memory responses on incongruent trials rated as remember, know, or 
guess. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Failes et al.
Page 22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. 
Correlation between average susceptibility to false hearing and average susceptibility to 
false memory (r = .39).
Failes et al.
Page 23
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Failes et al.
Page 24
Table 1
Odds of an accurate response by condition in the hearing task
Accurate response
Predictors
Odds Ratios
CI
P
 (Intercept)
1.20
1.00 – 1.44
0.049
 Congruent
8.34
6.49 – 10.72
<0.001
 Incongruent
0.43
0.34 – 0.53
<0.001
 Group
1.35
1.04 – 1.75
0.026
 Congruent:Group
1.76
1.20 – 2.59
0.004
 Incongruent:Group
0.70
0.51 – 0.95
0.023
Random Effects
 σ2
3.29
 τ00 Subject
0.42
 τ11 Subject.Congruent
0.53
 τ11 Subject.Incongruent
0.47
 ρ01
−0.13
−0.02
 ICC
0.18
 N Subject
118
 Observations
14160
0.348 / 0.463
Note. CI = 95% confidence interval around the odds; σ2 = residual variance in model; τ11 = variation in odds of a correct response within a given 
condition across subjects; ρ01 = correlation of deviations from the average odds between the baseline condition and the specified condition across 
subjects; ICC = intraclass correlation coefficient, a measure of response consistency within subjects.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Failes et al.
Page 25
Table 2
Odds of false hearing on incongruent trials in the hearing task
False hearing
Predictors
Odds Ratios
CI
P
 (Intercept)
0.49
0.38 – 0.62
<0.001
 Group
1.41
1.00 – 2.00
0.051
Random Effects
 σ2
3.29
 τ00 Subject
0.80
 ICC
0.20
 N Subject
118
 Observations
4720
0.007 / 0.202
Note. CI = 95% confidence interval around the odds; σ2 = residual variance in model; τ00 = variation in odds of false hearing in the incongruent

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Failes et al.
Page 26
Table 3
Odds of an accurate response by condition in the memory task
Accuracy
Predictors
Odds Ratios
CI
P
 (Intercept)
1.22
1.06 – 1.40
0.006
 Congruent
4.90
3.75 – 6.40
<0.001
 Incongruent
0.52
0.41 – 0.65
<0.001
 Group
1.52
1.24 – 1.87
<0.001
 Congruent:Group
1.63
1.09 – 2.43
0.018
 Incongruent:Group
0.40
0.29 – 0.56
<0.001
Random Effects
 σ2
3.29
 τ00 Subject
0.17
 τ11 Subject.Congruent
0.69
 τ11 Subject.Incongruent
0.50
 ρ01
−0.58
0.75
 N Subject
118
 Observations
10620
0.322 / NA
Note. CI = 95% confidence interval around the odds; σ2 = residual variance in model; τ11 = variation in odds of a correct response within a given 
condition across subjects; ρ01 = correlation of deviations from the average odds between the baseline condition and the specified condition across 
subjects; ICC = intraclass correlation coefficient, a measure of response consistency within subjects.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Failes et al.
Page 27
Table 4
Odds of false memory across age groups
False memory
Predictors
Odds Ratios
CI
P
 (Intercept)
1.32
1.01 – 1.74
0.044
 Group
1.64
1.11 – 2.43
0.013
Random Effects
 σ2
3.29
 τ00 Subject
1.00
 ICC
0.23
 N Subject
118
 Observations
3540
0.014 / 0.244
Note. CI = 95% confidence interval around the odds; σ2 = residual variance in model; τ00 = variation in odds of false memory in the incongruent

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Failes et al.
Page 28
Table 5
The relationship between susceptibility to false memory and susceptibility to false hearing
False hearing
Predictors
Odds Ratios
CI
P
 (Intercept)
0.52
0.42 – 0.66
<0.001
 Group
1.23
0.89 – 1.71
0.212
 Average false memory (z-scored)
1.45
1.22 – 1.71
<0.001
Random Effects
 σ2
3.29
 τ00 Subject
0.67
 ICC
0.17
 N Subject
118
 Observations
4720
0.039 / 0.202
Note. CI = 95% confidence interval around the odds; σ2 = residual variance in model; τ00 = variation in odds of false hearing in the incongruent