False memories in highly superior autobiographical
memory individuals
Lawrence Patihisa,1, Steven J. Frendaa, Aurora K. R. LePortb,c, Nicole Petersenb,c, Rebecca M. Nicholsa, Craig E. L. Starkb,c,
James L. McGaughb,c, and Elizabeth F. Loftusa
aDepartment of Psychology and Social Behavior, bDepartment of Neurobiology and Behavior, and cCenter for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697
Edited by George Sperling, University of California, Irvine, CA, and approved October 22, 2013 (received for review July 29, 2013)
The recent identification of highly superior autobiographical memory
(HSAM) raised the possibility that there may be individuals who
are immune to memory distortions. We measured HSAM partic-
ipants’ and age- and sex-matched controls’ susceptibility to false
memories using several research paradigms. HSAM participants
and controls were both susceptible to false recognition of non-
presented critical lure words in an associative word-list task. In a
misinformation task, HSAM participants showed higher overall
false memory compared with that of controls for details in a pho-
tographic slideshow. HSAM participants were equally as likely as
controls to mistakenly report they had seen nonexistent footage
of a plane crash. Finding false memories in a superior-memory
group suggests that malleable reconstructive mechanisms may
be fundamental to episodic remembering. Paradoxically, HSAM
individuals may retrieve abundant and accurate autobiographical
memories using fallible reconstructive processes.
hyperthymesia | DRM | suggestion | crashing memories
R
esearch on memory distortion suggests that episodic mem-
ory often involves a flawed reconstructive process (1–3).
Several false-memory paradigms developed in recent decades
have demonstrated this. For example, in the Deese-Roediger and
McDermott (DRM) (4, 5) paradigm, people falsely remember
words not actually presented in a related list of words. In the
misinformation paradigm, the content of a person’s memory can
be changed after they are exposed to misleading postevent in-
formation (2, 6, 7). In the nonexistent news-footage paradigm
(also known as the “crashing memory” paradigm), people some-
times recall witnessing footage of news events for which no
footage actually exists (8, 9). People can even remember events
following an imagination exercise that inflates their certainty
about events that they only imagined but did not actually expe-
rience (10). Even memory for our past emotions seems to be
reconstructed and prone to error (11). So far, memory dis-
tortions have been investigated in subjects who have typical
memory ability [children (12), adults (7), older adults (13)], but
not with people with unusually strong memory ability. Memory-
distortion phenomena have been explained by theoretical models
that state that memory is reconstructed from traces at retrieval
(1, 3, 14), is not reproduced from a permanent recording (15),
and is prone to errors caused by source confusion (16) and as-
sociation (17, 18). These studies and theoretical models paint
a picture of human memory as malleable and prone to errors.
However, a small number of individuals who have recently
been identified appear to be uniquely gifted in their ability to
accurately remember even trivial details from their distant past
(19–21). Highly superior autobiographical memory (HSAM; also
known as hyperthymesia) individuals can remember the day of
the week a date fell on and details of what happened that day
from every day of their life since mid-childhood. For details that
can be verified, HSAM individuals are correct 97% of the time
(20). For example, when one individual was asked what hap-
pened on October 19, 1987, she immediately responded with, “It
was a Monday. That was the day of the big stock market crash
and the cellist Jacqueline du Pré died that day.” HSAM indi-
viduals can remember what happened on a day a decade ago
better than most people can remember a day a month ago. In
some ways, these abilities seem to be at odds with what we know
about the reconstructive, unreliable, and malleable processes
underlying memory in people with typical memory.
HSAM abilities are distinct from previously described superior-
memory individuals (22–25) who typically rely upon practiced
mnemonics to remember unusually long lists of domain-specific
data, yet remain average in their ability to retrieve autobio-
graphical information. In contrast, HSAM individuals seem
not to be superior learners, exhibiting average scores on typical
laboratory memory tasks that are unrelated to autobiographical
memory. Furthermore, HSAM individuals recall their past in
rich detail and in a fashion that seems automatic and unaided by
explicit mnemonic techniques or rote practice. It is puzzling that
not all HSAM individuals report keeping diaries, routinely re-
freshing information (e.g., “what did I do on this day last year?”),
or categorizing and cataloging their experiences on certain dates
in their minds. The sheer amount of the personal experiences
that they can recall fluidly seems highly unusual, and on objective
measures of autobiographical memory the statistics are as-
tounding. For example, on the very challenging 10 Date Quiz
(see below), the mean score for HSAM participants is 25.5 SDs
above the mean score for control participants (Cohen’s d). Struc-
tural MRI brain scans of people with HSAM have shown mor-
phological differences in areas, such as the temporal gyri, that have
been previously described as contributing to autobiographical
memory (20). These areas were different in size and shape
Significance
In a unique memory-distortion study with people with extraor-
dinary memory ability, individuals with highly superior autobio-
graphical memory (HSAM) were as susceptible as controls to false
memory. The findings suggest that HSAM individuals reconstruct
their memories using associative grouping, as demonstrated by
a word-list task, and by incorporating postevent information, as
shown in misinformation tasks. The findings also suggest that
the reconstructive memory mechanisms that produce memory
distortions are basic and widespread in humans, and it may be
unlikely that anyone is immune. The assumption that no one is
immune from false memories has important implications in the
legal and clinical psychology fields, where contamination of
memory has had particularly important consequences in the past.
Author contributions: L.P., S.J.F., A.K.R.L., N.P., R.M.N., C.E.L.S., J.L.M., and E.F.L. designed
research; L.P. and A.K.R.L. performed research; L.P., S.J.F., N.P., and R.M.N. analyzed
data; and L.P., S.J.F., A.K.R.L., N.P., R.M.N., C.E.L.S., J.L.M., and E.F.L. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
See Commentary on page 20856.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed: E-mail: lpatihis@uci.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1314373110/-/DCSupplemental.
PNAS
|
December 24, 2013
|
vol. 110
|
no. 52
|
20947–20952
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
SEE COMMENTARY

compared with age- and sex-matched controls, but conclusions
have yet to be made as to if these differences are a result of na-
ture, nurture, or both.
Here, we tested HSAM individuals’ susceptibility to memory
distortion in the DRM, misinformation, nonexistent news foot-
age, imagination inflation, and memory for emotion paradigms
(see SI Materials and Methods and Figs. 1–3 for materials and
procedural details). We recruited 20 HSAM participants and 38
age- and sex-matched controls. Seven of these 20 HSAM par-
ticipants had previously been identified as HSAM individuals in
prior published studies (19, 20) and 13 are new to the literature.
HSAM participants were identified using a 30-question Public
Events Quiz (PEQ) and a 10 Date Quiz (20). These tests are
exceedingly difficult for control participants with normal mem-
ory. The PEQ consisted of 15 questions that asked participants
to give the date of a well-known public event, and 15 questions
that gave them a date and asked them to report a significant
public event. The 10 Date Quiz consisted of 10 randomly gen-
erated dates for which participants were to give the day of the
week that they fell on, a verifiable event within a month’s time of
them, and a description of a personal autobiographical event that
occurred on each of the dates. HSAM participants showed un-
usually high scores on both measures, compared with controls
(SI Materials and Methods).
Are people with HSAM abilities vulnerable to the same kinds
of distortions and errors that others are, or do their abilities
protect them in some way from suggestive influences? The an-
swer to this question will help elucidate both the workings of
HSAM and the nature of human memory more generally. If each
memory-distortion paradigm produces false memory in a group
with superior memory (as well as average-memory individuals, as
shown in past research), perhaps the malleable reconstructive
memory system is a fundamental part of human episodic mem-
ory. If we find HSAM individuals are only susceptible to some
distortions, but not the semiautobiographical ones (nonexistent
news footage, imagination, and memory for emotion), it suggests
they retrieve memories in the autobiographical domain differ-
ently than the rest of the population. If HSAM participants show
no memory distortions in any paradigm, such evidence would
question the view that malleable, reconstructive, and fallible
memory is in fact characteristic of all groups of people.
Results
To investigate the relationship between HSAM ability and memory
distortion susceptibility, we first compared HSAM individuals to
age- and sex-matched controls on a range of memory-distortion
tasks. We then performed a median split on HSAM participants,
comparing the 10 who scored above the HSAM median on the
PEQ (one of the objective measures of autobiographical memory
ability), to the 10 who scored below that median (for a median split
analysis on the 10 Dates Quiz, see Fig. S1).
Fig. 1 shows the DRM word-list false-memory task. There was
no significant difference between false-memory rates (recogni-
tion of critical lures: words not presented earlier, but related to
presented words) of HSAM individuals (M = 70.3%, SD =
17.1%) and controls [M = 70.8%, SD = 19.9%; t(55) = −0.10,
P = 0.922] (Fig. 1B). HSAM participants and controls incorrectly
indicated they had seen an average of 14 of the 20 critical lures
(HSAM range 8–20). In addition, there was no reliable differ-
ence in false-memory rate for HSAM individuals scoring low and
high in the PEQ measure of autobiographical memory ability
(Fig. 1D) [t(17) = 0.86, P = 0.403]. There were also no significant
Fig. 1.
The DRM false-memory associative word list: a sample of materials and the main results. (A) The materials consisted of 20 lists, each 15 words long.
Each word in a given list is related to a critical lure that the participants never actually saw. (B) The main result showed both HSAM individuals and controls
falsely recognized a similarly high proportion of critical lures (MHSAM = 14.1; MControl = 14.2 of 20). The y axis indicates the mean proportion. (C) Both groups
indicated seeing unrelated distractor words at the same proportion as one another, far less often than they endorsed seeing the critical lure words. (D) HSAM
participants with the highest autobiographical memory ability (highest scores on the PEQ) were not significantly less susceptible to falsely endorsing critical
lure words than HSAM participants who performed in the low range. (E) HSAM individuals outperformed controls on correctly recognized items that were
presented earlier (hit rate), *P = 0.035. Error bars represent SEs.
20948
|
Patihis et al.

differences in error rates of recognizing unrelated distractor
words that were neither presented earlier nor related to pre-
sented words (Fig. 1C) (HSAM participants 19.7%, controls
25.2%, P = 0.323; percentages in keeping with past DRM re-
search). However, we found that HSAM individuals correctly
recognized significantly more presented words (M = 76.6%,
SD = 14.2%) than controls [M = 64.8%, SD = 19.0%), t(55) =
2.16, P = 0.035]. A signal detection analysis revealed HSAM
participants were better at discriminating presented words from
critical lures than controls, but no better at discriminating un-
related distractors from presented words (Fig. S2).
We next compared HSAM individuals to controls on their
false-recognition rates of the five most emotionally arousing
critical lure words, and on the five least arousing critical lures.
This analysis revealed no significant differences between HSAM
participants and controls [emotional: t(55) = −0.39, P = 0.699;
neutral: t(55) = 0.17, P = 0.870].
On the misinformation task (Fig. 2), a statistically significant
misinformation effect was observed in both groups. Exposure to
misinformation caused participants to incorporate that infor-
mation into their memory for the original stimulus at signifi-
cantly higher rates than those who were not exposed (Fig. S3).
We quantified the misinformation false memories by two
metrics. Consistent with prior research (26), overall false mem-
ories (OFM) consisted of trials in which the participant chose
the misinformation version during the memory test (e.g., pants
pocket) (Fig. 2C). Source-confirmed false memories (SCFM)
consisted of trials in which the participant further confirmed
during the source test that he or she explicitly remembered
seeing the image in the original photographic slideshow (Fig.
2D). Contrary to being immune from false memories on this test
(Fig. 2E), HSAM participants (M = 2.65, SD = 1.53) had sig-
nificantly more OFM than controls [M = 1.92, SD = 1.10, t(56) =
2.09, P = 0.041]. There was no reliable difference in the OFM
score between those HSAM individuals with the highest auto-
biographical ability (PEQ) and the other HSAM participants
(Fig. 2G) [marginal P value: t(18) = −1.74, P = 0.098]. Similarly,
HSAM participants and controls showed remarkably similar
SCFM scores (Fig. 2F) [t(56) = 0.19, P = 0.848] and there was no
reliable evidence for a difference between the two sets of HSAM
participants (Fig. 2H) [t(18) = −1.47, P = 0.160].
Taken together, these results indicate that the HSAM group
exhibited false memories in the misinformation paradigm. The
HSAM individuals with the best autobiographical memory were
just as susceptible, if not more, to developing false memories,
compared with HSAM participants with lower scores on the PEQ.
Next, in the nonexistent news-footage paradigm, we examined
the tendency of HSAM participants and controls to report hav-
ing seen the nonexistent plane crash footage in the computer
questionnaire (Fig. 3 and SI Materials and Methods). Fig. 3D
Fig. 2.
The misinformation paradigm. (A) Participants saw two events that unfolded in slideshows consisting of 50 photographs each. The first event fea-
tured a man stealing a wallet from a woman while pretending to help, and the second event showed a man breaking into a car with a credit card and stealing
$1 bills and necklaces. (B) Later, participants read two narratives consisting of 50 sentences each, with six items of misinformation surreptitiously placed in
among the 94 true sentences. (C) In the memory test, picking the misinformation consistent response is counted as an OFM. (D) In the source test, if one also
indicates it was seen in the photos it is counted as a SCFM. The y axis gives the mean number of false memories. (E) HSAM participants had significantly higher
OFM than controls and (F) about the same SCFM. There were no statistically significant differences on either OFM (G) or SCFM (H) between those HSAM
individuals who scored highest on the PEQ and HSAM participants who had lower PEQ scores. Time intervals between A, B, C, and D are approximate. Error
bars represent SEs.
Patihis et al.
PNAS
|
December 24, 2013
|
vol. 110
|
no. 52
|
20949
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
SEE COMMENTARY

shows that 20% of HSAM individuals reported that they had
seen the footage and a similar 29% of controls reported that they
had seen it (Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.541). There were also no
differences in the number of false details remembered from the
footage (Fig. 3E) between HSAM participants (M = 1.20, SD =
1.40) and controls [M = 0.68, SD = 1.02; t(56) = 1.61, P = 0.113].
These results, when combined, suggest comparable susceptibility
to false memories in the nonexistent news-footage paradigm.
The nonexistent news-footage interview provides a more conser-
vative measure of false memory than the computer questionnaire.
Even in these interviews, we found both the HSAM group (Fig.
3F) as a whole and the most-capable HSAM individuals (Fig. 3G)
had nonzero susceptibility to semiautobiographical false mem-
ories. Using a 2 (HSAM, control) × 3 (“yes,” “maybe,” “no”)
Fisher’s exact test, we found no evidence for a difference in sus-
ceptibility (Fig. 3F) (P = 0.608). Comparing high PEQ HSAM to
lower PEQ HSAM participants (Fig. 3G) yielded a similar non-
significant result (Fisher’s exact test P = 0.721). Excerpts from
transcripts of a HSAM and control participants demonstrating these
false memories are available in Sample Nonexistent News-Footage
Interview Transcript Excerpts.
Finally, we also found susceptibility to memory distortions
in the imagination inflation and emotion memory consistency
paradigms in both HSAM individuals and controls (Figs. S4 and
S5), with no evidence for enhanced resistance to distortion in the
HSAM group. Table S1 summarizes both the autobiographical
memory scores and memory distortion measures for each HSAM
in the analysis, and suggests that no participant was immune to
memory distortion. In addition, we found no consistent rela-
tionship between age and susceptibility to memory distortion.
Discussion
Prior HSAM research showed a remarkable ability in these
individuals to recall even distant autobiographical information
with an exceptional level of accuracy. This finding might imply
that this population would be one of the most likely groups to be
immune to memory distortions. However, we found that HSAM
participants were as comparably susceptible to memory dis-
tortions as controls. This result was true on both relatively
neutral word lists and more emotionally involved tasks. HSAM
individuals showed normal levels of susceptibility to mis-
remembering nonexistent news footage when misleading sug-
gestion or imagination exercises were given. Significant news
Fig. 3.
Materials and results of the nonexistent news-footage paradigm. (A) The target news event is the crash of United 93 in Pennsylvania. (B) The
computer questionnaire stated that footage of the actual crash exists and asked participants to check whether they have seen the footage. (C) Later an in-
depth interview carefully explained what we were asking about, and asked them if they had seen that footage. (D) In the computer questionnaire, 20% of
HSAM individuals and 29% of controls indicated they had seen the footage. A median split of HSAM participants on the PEQ revealed 30% with higher PEQ
scores indicated “yes” they had seen the footage; only 10% with lower PEQ scores did so. (E) The number of false details (of a possible four) indicated HSAM
individuals were not statistically significantly higher than controls (P = 0.11). (F) In the interview, 10% of HSAM participants and 18% of the controls said yes
they had seen the footage, and (G) a median split revealed that the highest-scoring HSAM individuals on the PEQ were no less susceptible than those HSAM
participants lower on the PEQ. Error bars represent SEs.
20950
|
Patihis et al.

events, such as the crash of flight United 93 on September 11,
2001, are semiautobiographical in nature. These are events that
HSAM participants usually recall with far greater accuracy and
detail than controls, at least in the absence of misinformation
and other distorting influences. Given that we had reason to
expect HSAM individuals to be one of the least likely groups in
the population to be vulnerable to memory distortions, this set of
results, combined with previous research, gives credence to the
hypothesis
that
potentially
fallible
memory
reconstruction
mechanisms are ubiquitous and a part of normal human mem-
ory. In most situations the reconstructive processes involved in
memory are accurate. However, situations that make them in-
accurate in the typical population will also make them inaccurate
in this special population.
HSAM participants had significantly more OFM in the mis-
information task than controls. This result indicates that HSAM
participants, like others, are using memory reconstruction at the
time of recall and that they are vulnerable to confusing one
source (photos) from another (text narratives). To better un-
derstand this result, we compared HSAM individuals to controls
on individual difference measures that could indicate a strong
tendency to attend to and visualize the misinformation nar-
ratives. Indeed, we found that on the measures of absorption
(Tellegen Absorption Scale) and fantasy proneness (Creative
Experiences Questionnaire) HSAM participants were signifi-
cantly higher than controls. The absorption measure captures
“openness to absorbing and self-altering experiences” (27), and
the fantasy-proneness measure involves the tendency to have
vivid childhood memories and fantasize in a way that feels real
(28). Controlling for these measures in a multiple regression
eliminated the statistically significant difference between HSAM
individuals and controls on OFM (Table S2). This analysis
implies that absorption accounts for at least some of the reason
that HSAM participants had more OFM, and that could be
because of a deeper involvement or visualization during the
misinformation narratives.
Because HSAM individuals outperform controls on autobio-
graphical memory tasks, and because emotion is thought to play
a role in the encoding of such events, it was quite possible that
HSAM participants would be less susceptible to distortion of
emotional information than controls. However, we found no
evidence of this on the DRM test when we compared the most
emotionally arousing critical lures to the most neutral words. Nor
did we find conclusive evidence of this on the nonexistent news
footage or imagination inflation task involving a news report of
a potentially emotion-laden nationally significant plane crash.
We did find that HSAM individuals were more consistent than
controls in remembering some types of emotions, but were as
inconsistent as controls on others (Fig. S5).
Another way to view HSAM individuals is as experts in the
domain of their own autobiographical past. There is some evi-
dence that experts are more likely to experience false memory
for domain-relevant material using DRM word lists (29). Al-
though in the present study we did not find higher false mem-
ories in HSAM individuals’ own domain of expertise, our
conclusion that HSAM individuals use reconstructive retrieval
processes to access their domain of expertise is compatible with
that previous research.
HSAM individuals are a newly discovered, scientifically in-
teresting group. The present results build on previous HSAM
research that identified their unusually high autobiographical
ability (19–21). On daily life details from their personal past,
HSAM individuals have abundant and accurate recall (20). Our
findings do not contradict this. In fact, in the nonexistent news-
footage interviews we found examples of HSAM individuals’ rich
and very detailed autobiographical memory that were congruent
with past research (Example of a HSAM Individual’s Response
that Demonstrated Detailed Autobiographical Memory Ability). We
also know that their exceptional ability does not extend to tra-
ditional, nonautobiographical, and neutral laboratory tests of
memory with relatively short study–test intervals (20). Similar
results were observed in the current study as we observed similar
performance to controls when photographs were used in recog-
nition memory testing. We should note that HSAM participants
were slightly more accurate at recognizing presented words in
the DRM task. Their advantage here is not of the magnitude
observed for autobiographical memory. The present study adds
the knowledge that HSAM individuals as a group are compa-
rably susceptible to a number of memory-distortion phenomena.
Extraordinary autobiographical memory accuracy does not nec-
essarily imply false-memory immunity. Despite their apparent
accuracy of an extremely large memory store, HSAM individuals
seem to be using the same reconstructive memory mechanisms
that people with typical memory use.
It seems paradoxical that the HSAM group showed vul-
nerability to memory distortion yet remember an abundant
amount of autobiographical information accurately for years.
Their abundant accuracy could be the end result of strong au-
tobiographical memory traces combined with little or no mis-
information. If reminders of their personal past, such as diaries,
photos, videos, conversations with family, news stories, and so
forth, contain little misinformation then there may be very little
distortion in their recall. In addition, it also seems puzzling why
HSAM individuals remember some trivial details, such as what
they had for lunch 10 y ago, but not others, such as words on
a word list or photographs in a slideshow. The answer to this may
be that they may extract some personally relevant meaning from
only some trivial details and weave them into the narrative for
a given day.
There is a question as to whether the participants were con-
fidently reporting genuine memory distortions or merely guess-
ing or making mistakes. Although we cannot be completely sure
that a participant really experienced a visual false memory, we
did ask questions that were designed to try to ascertain whether
actual distortion was occurring. For example, in the DRM word-
list procedure, the vast difference in endorsement of critical lures
(about 70%) compared with unrelated distractors (about 20%)
tells us that a good proportion of the critical lure endorsements
are false reports/memories, rather than guesses. In the misin-
formation procedure, we found significantly higher misinfor-
mation endorsement in the experimental group compared with
the control group, which means that at least some of the memory
errors are not merely guesses or mistakes. We also had a source
test in which many participants confirmed they had seen a mis-
information detail in the original photographs, indicating rela-
tively high confidence of a false memory. In the nonexistent
news-footage procedure, the in-depth and detailed interview
revealed that some participants had high confidence in their
false memory because they gave false details, or by a high score
on the final question: “How well do you remember seeing the
video, from 1 = no memory at all, to 10 = very clear memory?”
Of those who said they had seen the video, 56% gave a score
on this scale above 5, suggesting that many were confident of
their false memory (see also transcripts in Sample Nonexistent
News-Footage Interview Transcript Excerpts).
A small sample size may typically pose limitations, but in this
case it did not because we found typical levels of memory dis-
tortions in HSAM participants and controls. In all cases the rates
were reliably above zero and in several cases the HSAM par-
ticipants were showing at least trends toward higher levels of
false memories. In addition, one could argue that the nonexistent
news-footage target event was only semiautobiographical in na-
ture, and not a fully personal memory. This aspect is both
a strength and a weakness: on the one hand 9/11 was a public
event that we know most people experienced and we know for
sure the footage does not exist, but on the other hand it may not
Patihis et al.
PNAS
|
December 24, 2013
|
vol. 110
|
no. 52
|
20951
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
SEE COMMENTARY

have been as personally significant as are other autobiographical
events (e.g., weddings).
HSAM individuals possess a remarkable autobiographical
memory. However, these results show that even they are not
immune to episodic memory distortions. Whatever the source of
their exceptional autobiographical memory ability is, this does
not prevent them from having memory distortions. Although it is
always possible that some group might be found to be immune to
memory distortions, none has as yet been discovered.
Materials and Methods
Over two sessions, 1 wk apart, 20 HSAM and 38 age- and gender-matched
controls participated in a number of memory distortion tasks. Twenty DRM
associative word lists were presented, followed by test. Misinformation para-
digm materials were presented in the form of photographical slideshows,
text narratives with some misleading items, and memory and source tests.
Nonexistent news footage was suggested both in computer questionnaires
and in verbal interviews.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Many thanks to Larry Cahill and Elizabeth S. Parker
for their previous research on highly superior autobiographical memory;
Nancy Collett; and all the research assistants, including Fellows of University
of California at Irvine’s Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program. This
research was supported by National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship Program (L.P.), Sigma-Xi Grant-in-Aid (to L.P.), the Gerard Family
Trust (J.L.M.), Unither Neurosciences (J.L.M.), Public Health Service National
Institute of Mental Health MH12526 (to J.L.M.), and National Institutes of
Health Grant 1R01AG034613 (to C.E.L.S.).
1. Bartlett FC (1932) Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology
(Cambridge Univ Press, New York).
2. Loftus EF (2005) Planting misinformation in the human mind: A 30-year investigation
of the malleability of memory. Learn Mem 12(4):361–366.
3. Katz AN (1989) Autobiographical memory as a reconstructive process. Can J Psychol
43(4):512–517.
4. Deese J (1959) On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in im-
mediate recall. J Exp Psychol 58(1):17–22.
5. Roediger HL, McDermott KB (1995) Creating false memories: Remembering words not
presented in lists. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 21(4):803–814.
6. Loftus EF, Palmer JC (1974) Reconstruction of automobile destruction: An example of the
interaction between language and memory. J Verbal Learn Verbal Behav 13(5):585–589.
7. Loftus EF, Miller DG, Burns HJ (1978) Semantic integration of verbal information into
a visual memory. J Exp Psychol Hum Learn 4(1):19–31.
8. Crombag HFM, Wagenaar WA, van Koppen PJ (1996) Crashing memories and the
problem of ‘source monitoring.’ Appl Cogn Psychol 10(2):95–104.
9. Smeets T, Telgen S, Ost J, Jelicic M, Merckelbach H (2009) What’s behind crashing
memories? Appl Cogn Psychol 23(9):1333–1341.
10. Garry M, Manning CG, Loftus EF, Sherman SJ (1996) Imagination inflation: Imagining
a childhood event inflates confidence that it occurred. Psychon Bull Rev 3(2):208–214.
11. Levine LJ (1997) Reconstructing memory for emotions. J Exp Psychol Gen 126(2):
165–177.
12. Sutherland R, Hayne H (2001) Age-related changes in the misinformation effect. J Exp
Child Psychol 79(4):388–404.
13. Mitchell KJ, Johnson MK, Mather M (2003) Source monitoring and suggestibility to
misinformation: Adult age-related differences. Appl Cogn Psychol 17(1):107–119.
14. Brainerd CJ, Reyna VF (2002) Fuzzy-trace theory and false memory. Curr Dir Psychol
Sci 11(5):164–169.
15. Loftus EF, Loftus GR (1980) On the permanence of stored information in the human
brain. Am Psychol 35(5):409–420.
16. Johnson MK, Hashtroudi S, Lindsay DS (1993) Source monitoring. Psychol Bull 114(1):3–28.
17. Collins AM, Loftus EF (1975) A spreading activation theory of semantic processing.
Psychol Rev 82(6):407–428.
18. Gallo DA, Roediger HL (2002) Evidence for associative activation and monitoring.
J Mem Lang 47(3):469–497.
19. Parker ES, Cahill L, McGaugh JL (2006) A case of unusual autobiographical re-
membering. Neurocase 12(1):35–49.
20. LePort AKR, et al. (2012) Behavioral and neuroanatomical investigation of Highly
Superior Autobiographical Memory (HSAM). Neurobiol Learn Mem 98(1):78–92.
21. Ally BA, Hussey EP, Donahue MJ (2013) A case of hyperthymesia: Rethinking the role
of the amygdala in autobiographical memory. Neurocase 19(2):166–181.
22. Luria AR (1968) The Mind of a Mnemonist: A Little Book About a Vast Memory
(Harvard Univ Press, Cambridge, MA).
23. Hunt E, Love T (1972) Coding Processes in Human Memory, eds Melton AW, Martin E
(Winston-Wiley, Washington, DC).
24. Gordon P, Valentine E, Wilding JM (1984) One man’s memory: A study of a mne-
monist. Br J Psychol 75(1):1–14.
25. Wilding J, Valentine E (1997) Superior Memory (Psychology Press, Hove, East Sussex).
26. Zhu B, et al. (2010) Individual differences in false memory from misinformation:
Cognitive factors. Memory 18(5):543–555.
27. Tellegen A, Atkinson G (1974) Openness to absorbing and self-altering experiences
(“absorption”), a trait related to hypnotic susceptibility. J Abnorm Psychol 83(3):
268–277.
28. Merckelbach H, Horselenberg R, Muris P (2001) The Creative Experiences Question-
naire (CEQ). Pers Individ Dif 31(6):987–995.
29. Castel AD, McCabe DP, Roediger HL, 3rd, Heitman JL (2007) The dark side of expertise:
Domain-specific memory errors. Psychol Sci 18(1):3–5.
20952
|
Patihis et al.