If you express it in the form of a negation, you can expect an effect
similar to misinformation
Iwona Dudeka,b
and Romuald Polczykb
aDoctoral School in the Social Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland; bInstitute of
Psychology, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland
The primary goal of the presented research was to investigate how processing post-event
information affects memory of details in an event viewed on video. We used two forms of
post-event information: classic misinformation (changing or implanting new information
into memory) and a new form that involves a correct explicit or implicit negation of the
existence of an object in the video. We followed the three-step procedure used in studies on
the misinformation effect, with a final memory test that was either immediate or delayed by
a week and consisted in indicating which objects appeared in the video. We replicated the
misinformation effect. More importantly, in the delayed test condition, both explicitly and
implicitly negated objects were falsely recalled more often than unmentioned objects. These
results indicate that it is possible to induce negation-related false memories; they also show
that memory is impaired by negated post-event information or misleading post-event
information.
Key words: explicit negation; eyewitness memory; false memory; implicit negation;
memory distortion; misinformation effect; negation memory; negation-related false
memories; post-event information; witness testimony.
Article History: Received 18 October 2022; Accepted 28 March 2023
Introduction
‘Saw the burglar up close and personal - no
balaclava in sight! Hope my eyewitness
account
can
help
catch
the
culprit.
#NoBalaclava
#CaughtInTheAct.’
Imagine
that you are the person who yesterday wit-
nessed a burglary and is now reading this post.
Like the author of the tweet, you also remem-
ber that the perpetrator was not wearing a bala-
clava on his face. The results of our study
show that if you were interviewed later and
asked if the perpetrator was wearing a bala-
clava, you would be less likely to answer cor-
rectly than an eyewitness who had not read
about the balaclava: ‘No, he was not.’ Our
results suggests that both explicitly and impli-
citly negating the presence of an object produ-
ces an effect similar to the misinformation
effect.
Intensive research on memory distortions
has been conducted since the 1970s, since
when it has been shown that exposure to mis-
information can have a considerable influence
on
our
thoughts,
memories
and
actions.
Greenspan and Loftus (2021) pointed out that
media coverage abounds with a lot of misin-
formation about a given disease and its effects
during global pandemics such as COVID-19.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/13218719.2023.
2206865.
Correspondence: Iwona Dudek, Instytut Psychologii UJ, ul. Ingardena 6, 30-060 Cracow, Poland.
E-mail: iwona.dudek@doctoral.uj.edu.pl
© 2023 The Australian and New Zealand Association of Psychiatry, Psychology and Law
Psychiatry, Psychology and Law, 2024
Vol. 31, No. 4, 638–658, https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13218719.2023.2206865

The term ‘infodemic’, which refers to a media
environment with abundant reliable and unreli-
able
information,
has
even
been
coined
(Greenspan & Loftus, 2021, see also World
Health Organisation, WHO, 2020). As a con-
sequence, retractions and corrections of the
information that reaches people have become
commonplace.
Knowledge
needs
to
be
updated, but correcting misinformation is
challenging
(M.
S.
Chan
et
al.,
2017;
Lewandowsky et al., 2012), though not impos-
sible (Walter & Tukachinsky, 2020). It has
also been shown that false news on social
media reaches more people and spreads faster
than
the
truth
(Vosoughi
et
al.,
2018).
Unfortunately, research shows that when faced
with an imminent threat (in this case, an elec-
tric shock), people’s ability to label negated
associations as false is impaired, while memo-
ries
of
‘true’
associations
remain
intact
(Newman et al., 2021).
Crucial aspects affected by misinforma-
tion and its denial or correction are part of the
field of forensic psychology and, in particular,
eyewitness testimony. Because of the recon-
structive nature of memory (Bartlett, 1932),
eyewitness testimony is susceptible to various
types of distortion, which can occur during a
criminal trial. Like physical evidence, such as
fingerprints on a smartphone, bloodstains on a
carpet or e-mails secured on the offender’s
computer, eyewitness memory traces can be
contaminated, lost or even fabricated (Wells
& Loftus, 2003).
This legal context of memory malleability
is within the area of interest of cognitive psy-
chologists such as Elizabeth Loftus. In the pro-
cedure developed by her research team (Loftus
et al., 1978), participants first viewed slides
depicting a crime or accident, then were pre-
sented with information about the event pep-
pered with misinformation, and finally their
memory of the original event was tested. The
results of their studies show that exposing peo-
ple to misinformation can have a negative
effect on their memory of past material.
This
phenomenon
is
referred
to
as
the
misinformation effect (Loftus, 2005). The
results of dozens of subsequent studies con-
firm that information that eyewitnesses are
exposed to after an event or during a trial can
distort their memory (see, e.g. Loftus, 2005,
for a summary). These memory distortions can
include both fine details of events (e.g. Dalton
& Daneman, 2006; Heath & Erickson, 1998;
Takarangi et al., 2006) and entire false events
(e.g. Chrobak & Zaragoza, 2008; Lindsay
et al., 2004; Pickrell et al., 2016; Wade et al.,
2002). In the legal context, this means that
suggestive questioning or suggestive lineup
procedures can lead to false testimony by eye-
witnesses. For example, recollections of events
that never occurred may be confused with rec-
ollections of actual events (see Wells &
Loftus, 2003).
Nonetheless, eyewitness testimony has
been considered one of the most persuasive
types of evidence in criminal trials. (e.g.
Benton et al., 2006). The severity of the prob-
lem is illustrated by the startling data from the
Innocence Project (2023). They show that a
total of 375 wrongful convictions have been
overturned by DNA testing in the United
States since 1989. In nearly 69% of these
cases, witness misidentification was identified
as a contributing factor to the wrongful convic-
tion, making it the leading cause of innocent
convictions.
Negation
The results of previous research that was con-
ducted in a wide range of research paradigms
using a variety of experimental tasks have
shown that negation processing is typically
difficult,
time-consuming
and
resource-
demanding
(e.g.
Deutsch
et
al.,
2006;
Dudschig et al., 2019; Ferguson et al., 2008;
Grant et al., 2004; Just & Carpenter, 1976;
Kaup et al., 2006; Wason, 1959, but see also
Nieuwland & Kuperberg, 2008; for review see
Kaup & Dudschig, 2020). What is more, it is
also not always effective and sometimes pro-
duces the opposite effect than intended (e.g.
639

Maciuszek, 2013; Wegner et al., 1998). The
harmful effects of negation are perfectly illus-
trated by the results of research on the ‘white
bear effect’. In this experiment, participants
who actively tried not to think about a white
bear were haunted by exactly this image
(Wegner et al., 1987). However, negation
processing appears to not only use (or fall
back on) the cognitive control mechanisms
that are typically reported during action control
(de Vega et al., 2016; Dudschig & Kaup,
2018; Wirth et al., 2019).
The examples are research on the backfire
effect, in which correction of misinformation
inadvertently increases belief in the misinfor-
mation compared to the pre- correction or no-
correction baseline (Swire-Thompson et al.,
2020). There are two types of backfire effects:
the worldview backfire effect and the familiar-
ity backfire effect, both of which appear to be
based on different psychological mechanisms.
The worldview backfire effect occurs when a
correction challenges a person’s belief system
(Cook & Lewandowsky, 2012), and the famil-
iarity backfire effect occurs when misinforma-
tion is repeated as part of a correction
(Schwarz et al., 2007). This correction, in
which misinformation is repeated to invalidate
it, can increase the familiarity of the informa-
tion, and thus unintentionally increase belief in
the claim (Prike et al., 2023). Recent meta-
analyses suggest that the backfire effect occurs
rather rarely and, if so, only under specific
conditions
(Ecker
et
al.,
2022;
Swire-
Thompson et al., 2020, 2022). For example,
Autry and Duarte (2021) found that when par-
ticipants were not initially exposed to novel
misinformation and were then exposed to a
correction, it had an adverse effect, resulting in
even greater reliance on the misinformation
than if they were not exposed to either the mis-
information or the correction. Autry and
Duarte (2021) explain this familiarity backfire
effect by arguing that the negation effect is
context-dependent–that is, if the presuppos-
ition being denied is known or can be easily
processed, the negation is licensed and may
produce the negation effect. Remarkably,
Autry and Duarte (2021) found a significant
backfire effect only in their first experiment;
moreover, Prike et al. (2023) failed to replicate
this effect in their three experiments.
Negation-related false memories
Other general cognitive mechanisms utilized
in non-linguistic cognition involved in neg-
ation processing is memory (e.g. Deutsch
et al., 2006; Fiedler et al., 1996; Mayo et al.,
2004, 2014). A fairly new trend in negation
research was initiated by Maciuszek and col-
leagues (Maciuszek et al., 2019a, 2019b;
Maciuszek & Polczyk, 2017), focusing on the
discovery of the paradoxical effect of negation.
This effect, called negation-related false mem-
ories (NRFM), consists in a false memory that
the negated object was actually present or that
the negated behavior actually occurred.
Researchers initially focused on the effect
of explicit negation, which is constituted in
English by words such as no, not, never,
nobody and affixes such as unhappy, as well
as explicitly negative quantifiers such as
scarcely, hardly, few, seldom, little, only
(Clark, 1980). In a series of three experiments,
Maciuszek and Polczyk (2017) demonstrated
and replicated the NRFM effect. In their study,
the participants were familiarized with a
description of a house (or activities performed
by a car driver) in which some items (or activ-
ities) were mentioned, some were explicitly
negated, and some were not mentioned (i.e.
they did not appear in the description and
served as control items in the memory test).
The negation was contained in the sentences
that comprised the description played back to
the participants–for example, ‘There is a living
room in the house, but there is no porch’. The
final memory test occurred either 5 min after
the presentation of the description or 1 week
later. The test asked participants to mark for
each item whether it was ‘Present’ (i.e. listed
in the recording as being present in the home)
or ‘Not present’ in the home. In the 5-min
delay condition, there were no statistically
640

significant differences in recognition between
negated and unmentioned items. In contrast, in
the 1-week delay condition, participants recog-
nized negated items as present more frequently
than unmentioned items (they committed more
false recognitions). This pattern of results was
repeated in all three experiments. Furthermore,
in the second and the third experiments, the
difference in the number of false recognitions
of negated items did not differ significantly
from the number of correct recognitions of
items indicated as present in the description.
Subsequent studies (Maciuszek et al.,
2019a) compared the effect of explicit and
implicit negation. The latter is constituted by
pragmatic inferences and includes expressions
like forget, fail, doubt, deny (Xiang et al.,
2016). Similarly, to the previous study, partici-
pants listened to a recording in which some
objects were mentioned as present, some were
mentioned as absent, and some were not men-
tioned at all. In one study condition, the
absence of objects was expressed using expli-
cit negation, while in the second condition it
was expressed using implicit negation. The
memory test took place either 5 min or 1 week
after participants heard the recording of the
house description. The results indicate that
explicit and implicit negation led to almost
identical
false
recall
of
negated
items.
However, items not mentioned in the record-
ing (i.e. controls– namely, items that were nei-
ther mentioned nor negated in the recording)
were more often recognized as present by par-
ticipants exposed to implicit negation than by
those
exposed
to
explicit
negation.
The
researchers indicated that the mechanism that
was possibly responsible for the false recall of
negated
items
could
be
that
participants
remember the item itself but forget the context
in which it was present (an affirmative or
negative utterance), hence items would be
recalled as present only because they were
mentioned.
The latest research on NRFM compared
the memory effects of implicit negation and
explicit
negation
and
tested
whether
processing
the
former
type
of
negation
requires more cognitive effort (Maciuszek
et al., 2019b). Three experiments were con-
ducted using the same methodology as that in
the authors’ previous study (Maciuszek &
Polczyk, 2017; Maciuszek et al., 2019a) – that
is, by presenting to the participants source
material consisting of a recorded description
of a house in which the existence of certain
objects was negated explicitly or implicitly
(depending on the group) or was not men-
tioned; then the number of false alarms com-
mitted by the participants in the memory test
was compared. In the first experiment, how-
ever,
participants
independently
read
the
source material at their own pace, which was
measured. No differences were demonstrated
between explicit and implicit negation in the
number of false alarms for negated and
unmentioned items, answer time or time spent
reading the description. In the next two experi-
ments, the researchers manipulated the time
spent reading the source material (in the
second experiment, the exposure time was
fixed, unlike in the first experiment, where
participants read the description at their own
pace) or the information about the upcoming
memory test (in the third experiment, partici-
pants were warned about the test, unlike in the
other studies). The results of these three stud-
ies
were
summarized
as
indicating
that
‘implicit and explicit negation have very simi-
lar
if
not
identical
effects
on
memory’
(Maciuszek et al., 2019b, p. 301), and both
need comparable cognitive effort because they
require a similar amount of processing time.
In addition to the paradigm described
above, in order to investigate whether a state-
ment in the original material that negates the
existence of an object (or action) can increase
false memories of that object (or action), there
are other strands of research investigating the
effect of negation on memory. In the context
of the present experiment, the strand identified
as ‘the effect on memory of correct denying’
is important (see Maciuszek & Polczyk,
2017). It examines the effect on participants’
641

memory of their negation of the existence of
certain objects or object properties in a subse-
quent memory test. The sequence of the study
was as follows: participants were exposed to
original material (e.g. a video showing the
interior of the house) in which there was no
negation; they then answered questions about
the existence of certain objects (Fiedler et al.,
1996) or object features (Mayo et al., 2014).
Correctly answering some of the questions
required the participant to negate the existence
of an object or object feature. For example, in
a study by Fiedler et al. (1996), participants
were asked whether there was a teddy bear in
the living room (which there really was not);
in a study by Mayo et al. (2014), participants
in one condition were asked whether a sculp-
ture in a glass case was blue, and in the second
condition they were asked whether it was red
(it actually was red). In the study by Fiedler
et al. (1996), study participants correctly
negated the presence of objects that were not
present; in Mayo et al.’s study, participants
correctly answered ‘no’ or ‘yes’, respectively.
This was followed by a final memory test in
which participants were asked whether some
items were in the original material. Fiedler
et al. (1996) revealed that although participants
correctly negated the presence of absent
objects in the first memory test, they failed to
do so in the second memory test. For example,
correctly negating the presence of a teddy bear
in the living room in the first memory test
resulted in participants incorrectly indicating
the presence of a teddy bear in the second,
final memory test. In a series of four experi-
ments performed by Mayo et al. (2014), it was
found that correct negation of a feature of an
object led to greater memory loss for that
object than correct affirmation of that feature.
That is, participants showed greater memory
loss regarding the sculpture in the display case
when they were in the ‘no’ condition than
when they were in the ‘yes’ condition.
Interestingly, the rate of memory loss in the
negation condition was still greater than for
items
not
followed
by
a
question.
In
conclusion, repetition in the form of a question
increased recall, but the increase was smaller
in the ‘no’ response condition.
The study conducted by Mayo et al.
(2014) fits into research on the misinformation
effect. They investigated whether information
received after the event impairs an existing
memory. On the surface, the research para-
digms of Mayo et al. (2014) and Fiedler et al.
(1996) were similar, but the research results
produced seemingly contradictory findings.
The study by Fiedler et al. (1996) shows that
negation of a non-existent object can lead to
false memory of that object. Simply put, they
demonstrated that when propositions are proc-
essed in the form of ‘no-XYZ’, participants
are prone to losing the ‘no’ and remembering
the ‘XYZ’. The researchers explain this by
suggesting that thinking about an object and
negating it during the first memory test leads
to the creation of a transient representation of
that object, which is activated during the final
memory test and results in false memories.
However, in the Mayo et al. (2014) study, the
negation of an attribute of a present object
might make participants forget the object. The
mechanism
of
negation-induced
forgetting
remains unexplored, but Mayo et al. (2014)
speculate that it may be related to the inhibi-
tory character of the negation process: inhib-
ition of the negated feature appears to spread
to the object to which the feature is attributed.
That is, during the first memory test, the par-
ticipants presuppose the negated feature and
thus generate a transient memory representa-
tion of the object with the incorrect feature;
they then correctly negate it, which leads to
the object representation being inhibited and
its presence being forgotten (Mayo et al.,
2014).
Overview of the present study
Using the classic three-step procedure for
investigating the misinformation effect (Loftus
et al., 1978), the aim of our study was to repli-
cate the NRFM effect and compare its magni-
tude with that of the misinformation effect.
642

As in previous NRFM studies (Maciuszek
et al., 2019a, 2019b), we concentrated on
explicit and implicit negation ‘as a function of
informing the absence of objects and, more
specifically, in the context of memory recogni-
tion
of
implicitly
and
explicitly
negated
objects.’ (Maciuszek et al., 2019b, p. 294). In
our study, explicit negation means that we
informed about the absence of an object by
means of a sentence in which the expression
‘not’ or ‘no’ occurred (see examples in the
Materials section). In a forensic context, con-
sider a description of the crime scene, which
people become familiar with – for example,
when reading a newspaper and are later inter-
rogated. The description of the same situation
can be expressed by explicit or implicit neg-
ation: The case was difficult to unravel. There
were no witnesses at the crime scene. The per-
petrator left no fingerprints. There were no
traces of the victim’s blood (explicit negation).
or All witnesses were absent. If the perpetrator
had left fingerprints or if traces of the victim’s
blood had been found, the case would have
been easier to unravel (implicit negation).
A secondary goal of the study was to
examine whether the typicality of details mod-
erated the effect of post-event information pre-
sented in the form of explicit, implicit and
misinformation on recognition. We considered
that the typicality of details in post-event infor-
mation is a factor that has important implica-
tions
for
the
psychology
of
eyewitness
testimony. As mentioned earlier, eyewitnesses
are exposed to different information from dif-
ferent sources. On the one hand, if the post-
event information contains atypical details,
this may increase the likelihood of memory
distortion because atypical details are better
remembered than typical ones (this is called
the ‘typicality effect,’ e.g. Davidson, 1994).
This could lead to the atypical details being
included in the memory of the original event.
On the other hand, in research on the NRFM
(Maciuszek & Polczyk, 2017, Exp. 1), the typ-
icality effect occurred only for not-mentioned
items. In the case of mentioned and negated
items, the differences between typical and
non-typical
items
were
not
significant.
However, Maciuszek and Polczyk’s (2017)
research design consisted of two phases: famil-
iarization with the source material and a recog-
nition test. It also included one type of
negation (explicit negation). Thus, our goal
was to investigate the role of typicality in a
three-stage paradigm in which post-event
information takes the form of two types of
negations and misinformation.
Our study was therefore part of a narrow
line of research investigating whether post-
event information (PEI) can affect memory
accessibility (Ayers & Reder, 1998; Wright
et al., 2001). Post-event information has so far
taken the following forms (for a detailed
description, see Mayo et al., 2014; Wright
et al., 2001): (a) changing one piece of infor-
mation to another (e.g. in the original material
someone is playing a guitar, and in the post-
event material someone is playing a piano;
Loftus et al., 1978); (b) implanting information
into memory (e.g. the original material does
not show a guitarist, but a guitarist appears in
the post-event material, e.g. Loftus & Pickrell,
1995); (c) omitting in the PEI the information
shown in the original material (e.g. a person
playing a guitar appears in the original mater-
ial but is not mentioned in the post-event
material, e.g. Loehr & Marche, 2006); (d) the
post-event material consists of questions about
items or item features from the original mater-
ial (Mayo et al., 2014). A correct answer to a
question requires a ‘no’ answer (for example,
the original material shows an acoustic guitar,
and the question is whether the guitar was
electric). In our study, we tested whether PEI
influences memory in the first and second
ways, and we proposed testing yet another
form of PEI influence– namely, providing in
the form of negation true information that was
not mentioned at all in the original material.
Referring to the example with the guitarist and
the guitar, in our experiment there would be
no guitarist in the original material, and PEI
would say that ‘There was no guitarist’
643

(explicit negation) or ‘If only there were a gui-
tarist’ (implicit negation).
Our study is similar to the original NRFM
study in the sense that it also tests whether a
statement that negates the existence of an
object can increase false memories of that
object. However, it differs from the original
NRFM study in that the statement is included
in the post-event material. Like Maciuszek
(Maciuszek & Polczyk, 2017; Maciuszek
et al., 2019a, 2019b), as material we used a
coherent story that contained negation. Unlike
the methodology of the studies by Mayo et al.
(2014) and Fiedler et al. (1996), where partici-
pants generated negation on their own, in our
study the negation was administered to partici-
pants in PEI.
Hypotheses
In the present research, the following hypothe-
ses were formulated:
Hypothesis 1: The misinformation effect will
be replicated: the number of ‘Present’ answers
for misleading items (i.e. those mentioned in
PEI but not present in the original material),
will be significantly higher than that for
unmentioned (control) items. The occurrence
of the misinformation effect has already been
confirmed so many times (see Loftus, 2005)
that it is even sometimes referred to as one of
the most important discoveries of psychology
(Zaragoza et al., 2007).
Hypothesis 2: After a 1-week interval, both
explicit and implicit negation will result in
false recall of negated details as being present
in
the
original
material:
the
number
of
‘Present’ responses in the 1-week delay condi-
tion will be higher for explicitly negated
(Hypothesis
2a)
and
implicitly
negated
(Hypothesis 2b) objects than for unmentioned
(control) items.
The assumption that a time delay is needed
for the NRFM effect to manifest itself requires
a comment. In all the NRFM studies to date,
the effect in the immediate recall condition
was non-significant but was revealed in the
delayed memory test condition (Maciuszek &
Polczyk, 2017; Maciuszek et al., 2019a,
2019b). This is probably because the memory
of negated items during the immediate mem-
ory test is still strong, thus there is not yet
room for NRFM effects. It is indicated that the
integration of negation during comprehension
is usually delayed and requires more attention
(Kaup & Dudschig, 2020). Increased attention
during PEI familiarization may lead to better
recall of PEI and fewer errors in the immediate
memory test. This beneficial effect of attention
does not occur in the delayed memory test
condition, thus resulting in the NRFM effect.
Since explicit and implicit negation appear to
have the same effect on memory (Maciuszek
et al., 2019a, 2019b), we assume that the
NRFM effect will also manifest itself after a
time delay in the case of implicit negation.
Hypothesis 3: Both the NRFM and the misin-
formation effect will be stronger for typical
details than for atypical details because of the
tendency to fill memory gaps with items that
conform to schemas and scripts and are there-
fore typical. Schemas can enhance memory
formation (Alba & Hasher, 1983; Stangor &
McMillan, 1992) and help in understanding
and retrieving information. People use sche-
mas to compensate for lost, uncoded or miss-
ing information (Luna & Seco, 2008). The
information extracted from schemas tends to
be typical information – that is, information
that frequently appears in similar situations
(e.g. Brewer & Treyens, 1981; Garcıa-Bajos
& Migueles, 2003). Previous research has
demonstrated that, on the one hand, during
recollection there are more hits for typical
information if it is true for the given situation
(i.e. the content of the schema corresponds to
reality); on the other hand, there are also more
false alarms for highly typical information if it
is false for the given situation (the content of
the schema does not correspond to the actual
situation; Bower et al., 1979; Brewer &
Treyens, 1981; Garcıa-Bajos & Migueles,
2003; Lampinen et al., 2001; Nakamura et al.,
644

1985). The relationship between the typicality
of details and the misinformation effect has
been studied by, for example, Holst & Pezdek
(1992); Luna &
Seco (2008); Smith &
Studebaker (1996, Exp. 1). The results of these
studies indicate that the misinformation effect
is greater for details with high typicality than
for details with low typicality (Luna & Seco,
2008; Smith & Studebaker, 1996, Exp. 1). For
example, in the Luna and Seco (2008) study,
participants incorporated more high-typicality
information into memory than low-typicality
information, regardless of whether it was true
or false (in other words, for high-typicality
details, there were more of both hits and false
alarms). Their study used implanted and
altered PEI; the results indicate that there were
no differences between altered and added
details in terms of the number of false alarms
(Luna & Seco, 2008).
Exposure to post-event information leads
to the inclusion of elements in memories that
were not present in the original event (Lindsay
& Johnson, 1989; Loftus et al., 1978). In the
context of misleading PEI (changing or adding
elements), this is explained in such a way that
exposure to PEI leads to a more liberal
response criterion based on a sense of familiar-
ity and, consequently, acceptance of the misin-
formation (Hekkanen & McEvoy, 2002; Luna
& Migueles, 2009). The effects of negating
PEI have not yet been studied, but we predict
that participants in this case will also produce
more false alarms for typical details (explicitly
or implicitly negated) than for atypical details
because they will remember the detail but not
the context in which it occurred (explicit or
implicit negation). This can lead to the same
effect as presenting PEI in the form of misin-
formation: an increased tendency to respond
‘present’ for typical items.
In conclusion, compared to atypical items
of each of these types, we hypothesize that
there will be more false alarms for typical
items: misleading (Hypothesis 3a), negated
explicitly (Hypothesis 3b), negated implicitly
(Hypothesis
3c),
but
also
unmentioned
(control) (Hypothesis 3d). Since details with
high typicality are part of the schema (Bartlett,
1932), when presented in a recognition mem-
ory test, participants will be able to retrieve
them from memory, either because they will
recall that memory or because they will extract
them from the schema. Similarly, as in other
studies, we assume that participants will tend
to respond that they had seen typical objects
before (Martın-Luengo et al., 2013).
Method
Prior to data collection, a positive opinion
from the Jagiellonian University Institute of
Psychology Research Ethics Committee in
Cracow, Poland was obtained as written con-
sent for participation from all persons in the
study.
Participants
Two hundred participants recruited through
social media advertisements took part in the
study and were paid 25 PLN net for their par-
ticipation. Data from 159 people (64.2%
women)
aged
18–72 years
(M 1⁄4 26.45,
SD 1⁄4 10.31) were included in the analysis.
Data from 41 participants were excluded on
the basis of post-experimental interviews,
because these subjects had previously partici-
pated in memory distortion studies or guessed
hypotheses.
Materials
‘1’ Original material: A silent video clip
depicting the theft of a laptop, lasting
1 min 32 s (a detailed description of the
clip
is
included
in
Supplementary
materials).
‘2’ Post-event material: A story (193
words) describing the content of the
original video. Eight different stories
were prepared. Each story contained
four misleading details, four explicitly
negated details (information that the
645

object was not in the video, while it
was actually not in the video), four
implicitly
negated
details
(their
absence was mentioned in a certain
context, and they were indeed not in
the video). We created two versions of
the post-event material: one contained
rather
typical
objects
(such
as
a
printer, sandwich, necklace), while the
other included rather atypical objects
(such as a cassette, collar necklace,
poncho). In each of the versions of the
story, four details were not mentioned
(used as a control in the memory test),
explicitly negated, implicitly negated
or misleading (see Table 1 with exam-
ples of how misinformation and expli-
cit
and
implicit
negations
were
introduced).
Full counterbalancing was used so that
each of the items appeared in each of the
four
conditions: misleading,
explicitly
negated,
implicitly
negated
and
not
mentioned. In sum, to assure counterbal-
ancing there were four versions of each of
the two conditions (typical and atypical
items). The stories were recorded and
played to the participants, who also fol-
lowed the text on a computer screen.
‘3’ Memory test: The memory test consisted
of 20 items, 16 of which related to crit-
ical details (four misleading, four expli-
citly negated, four implicitly negated
and four not mentioned), and four buffer
details, which were actually present in
the video. Separate memory tests were
created for typical and atypical details.
Depending
on
which
version
was
assigned to a participant, a particular
detail might have served for this partici-
pant as misleading, explicitly negated,
implicitly negated or a control item (not
mentioned). The participants’ task was
to mark whether the given item was pre-
sent or absent in the original material–
that is, in the video.
Table 1.
Examples of how misinformation and explicit and implicit negations were introduced.
Detail
Examples of sentences with:
Misinformation
Explicit negation
Implicit negation
Binder (typical)
The office could use a
printer, but there is a
binder.
There is a calendar in
the office, but no
binder.
If there were a binder,
the papers from the
desk could be
organised
Motorcycle (typical)
The thief turns the
corner of the
building, where her
motorcycle is parked
Her motorcycle, on
which she can
quickly escape, is
not there
If her motorcycle had
been standing there,
she could have
quickly escaped
Collar (atypical)
The employee’s neck is
adorned with a
collar.
The employee’s neck is
not adorned with a
collar.
The employee has no
ornaments around
her neck, perhaps
she will wear a
collar after work
Trolleybus (atypical)
On the street, a
trolleybus can be
seen moving.
The street is empty, not
even a trolleybus is
running.
The street wouldn’t be
so empty if a
trolleybus were
running.
646

Procedure
Participants were tested individually using a
computerized procedure. At the beginning,
they were familiarized with the original mater-
ial (they watched the video). Then, they solved
the filler tasks (these were questionnaires, used
for the purpose of another study), then they
listened to the recorded post-event material –
that is, one of the eight stories. The text of the
story was displayed on their computer screen
so that they could follow it with their eyes.
They then continued to complete their filler
tasks. Later, depending on the condition, they
either were dismissed (delayed memory test
condition) or proceeded to complete the mem-
ory test (immediate memory test condition).
According to the instructions, they had to indi-
cate, on the basis of what they remembered
from the video, whether a given object was
present or absent in the video they had
watched. The 20 objects were listed in alpha-
betical order. Afterwards, they were asked
about previous participation in psychological
studies and their predictions about the real pur-
pose of the study, after which they were de-
briefed. Participants in the delayed memory
test condition took the test a week later and
then answered the same questions as partici-
pants in the immediate memory test condition,
after which they were debriefed.
Experimental design
A 2  2  4 design was applied, with two
between-participants factors: delay (immediate
vs. 1 week) and the version of the story
(typical vs. atypical items). There was one
within-participants factor: type of information
(misleading vs. explicitly negated vs. impli-
citly negated vs. not mentioned). The depend-
ent variable was the number of ‘Present’
answers in the memory test; for each of the
four types of information, the possible range
of answers was from 0 to 4. For all four types
of information, the ‘Present’ response was
incorrect (representing a false alarm).
Power analysis
The experimental design used in the present
research included two between-subjects factors
(with two levels each), one repeated-measures
factor (four levels) and interactions between
the grouping factors with the repeated meas-
ures. The analyses were performed for small,
medium and large effects according to conven-
tions suggested by Cohen (1988): g2
p 1⁄4 .01,
.06 and .14, which correspond to Cohen f 1⁄4
0.1, 0.25 and 0.44. The software GPower
was used for the analyses (Faul et al., 2007).
Assuming 80% of the required power, the
sample sizes for the three effect sizes were
138, 26 and 12. The final sample size used in
the
present
research
(N1⁄4 159)
assures
adequate power even for small effects.
Results
The descriptive statistics across all conditions
are presented in Table 2 and Figure 1.
Using the proportion of false alarms for
the 16 critical items in the recognition test
(four misleading, four explicitly negated, four
implicitly negated and four not mentioned,
serving
as
control)
–
that
is,
‘Present’
responses – we performed an analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA): 4 (type of information: mis-
leading, explicitly negated, implicitly negated,
unmentioned)  2 (typicality: typical, atyp-
ical)  2 (delay: immediate, 1 week). We for-
mulated all of our hypotheses a priori and
referred to specific combinations of factor lev-
els. Consequently, we adopted the strategy of
planned comparisons: we report the results of
the ANOVAs for the main effects and interac-
tions; however, when verifying particular
hypotheses, we rely on simple effects as these
are best suited to a priori hypotheses (Keppel
& Wickens, 2004; Rosenthal & Rosnow,
1985; Rosnow & Rosenthal, 1989). In addition
to the frequentist approach, we also used the
Bayesian approach in our analyses, using the
method proposed by Masson (2011). To inter-
pret the resulting Bayes factors, we used the
classification proposed by van Doorn et al.
647

(2021). According to this, a Bayes factor (BF)
of less than 0.1 indicates strong evidence; a
factor between 0.1 and 0.3 indicates moderate
evidence for the null hypothesis (H0); a factor
between 0.3 and 3 indicates weak/inconclusive
evidence; a factor between 3 and 10 indicates
moderate evidence; while a factor greater than
10 indicates strong evidence in favour of the
alternative hypothesis (H1; van Doorn et al.,
2021).
Overall, the type of information (mislead-
ing, explicitly negated, implicitly negated and
unmentioned)
significantly
influenced
the
number of ‘Present’ answers, F(3, 465) 1⁄4
14.53, p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .09, BF10 > 100; it was
higher in the case of misleading items than in
the remaining three cases.
There were more false alarms for the mis-
leading details (M 1⁄4 1.82) than for unmen-
tioned (control) items (M 1⁄4 1.24), F(1, 155) 1⁄4
27.06, p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .15, BF10 > 100, indi-
cating the detrimental effect of misleading
post-event information on memory. This effect
was present in both the immediate condition
and the delayed condition: questions regarding
misleading items in the description were more
often answered as ‘Present’ than those regard-
ing unmentioned items: F(1, 155) 1⁄4 13.05, p
< .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .08, BF10 1⁄4 49.25; F(1, 155) 1⁄4
13.99, p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .08, BF10 1⁄4 76.10,
respectively. There was no difference between
the number of ‘present’ responses for mislead-
ing details between the immediate and delayed
test conditions, F(1, 155) 1⁄4 0.14, p 1⁄4 .703,
Table 2.
Means and standard deviations for the ‘Present’ answers across experimental conditions.
Delay
Typicality
Misleading
M (SD)
Explicitly negated
M (SD)
Implicitly negated
M (SD)
Control
M (SD)
N
Immediate
Typical
2.13 (1.03)
1.23 (0.96)
0.85 (0.99)
1.67 (0.96)
39
Atypical
1.43 (1.26)
0.89 (0.94)
0.62 (0.79)
0.70 (0.91)
37
Total
1.79 (1.19)
1.07 (0.96)
0.74 (0.90)
1.20 (1.05)
76
One week
Typical
1.98 (1.02)
1.98 (1.02)
1.91 (1.10)
1.59 (1.11)
44
Atypical
1.72 (1.12)
1.31 (1.17)
1.31 (1.24)
0.92 (0.96)
39
Total
1.86 (1.07)
1.66 (1.14)
1.63 (1.20)
1.28 (1.09)
83
Total
Typical
2.05 (1.02)
1.63 (1.06)
1.41 (1.17)
1.63 (1.03)
83
Atypical
1.58 (1.19)
1.11 (1.08)
0.97 (1.10)
0.82 (0.93)
76
Total
1.82 (1.13)
1.38 (1.09)
1.20 (1.15)
1.24 (1.06)
159
k
e
e
w
e
n
O
etaid
e
m
m
I
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Misleading Explicitly
negated
Implicitly
negated
Control
Means fo 'Present' answers
Typical
Atypical
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Misleading Explicitly
negated
Implicitly
negated
Control
Means fo 'Present' answers
Typical
Atypical
Figure 1. Mean numbers of ‘Present’ answers across experimental conditions.
648

g2
p < .01; also, the Bayesian analysis provided
support for no between-condition differences
(BF10 1⁄4 0.09). Significantly more false alarms
for misleading items than for unmentioned
items were committed for both typical and
atypical details: F(1, 155) 1⁄4 7.20, p 1⁄4 .008,
g2
p 1⁄4 .04, BF10 1⁄4 2.94 (the Bayes factor was
rather moderate in this case); F(1, 155) 1⁄4
21.33, p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .12, BF10 > 100,
respectively.
Thus,
these
results
support
Hypothesis 1, which assumes the existence of
the misinformation effect.
The interaction between the type of infor-
mation (misleading, explicitly negated, impli-
citly negated and unmentioned) and delay was
statistically significant, although the Bayesian
analysis did not confirm it, F(3, 465) 1⁄4 6.71,
p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .04, BF10 1⁄4 0.08. The planned
comparisons revealed that, in the immediate
condition, the items explicitly negated in the
description were not more often indicated as
‘Present’ than were unmentioned items, F(1,
155) 1⁄4 0.68, p 1⁄4 .410, g2
p 1⁄4 .00, BF10 1⁄4
0.11. In contrast, the items implicitly negated
in the description were significantly less fre-
quently indicated as ‘Present’ than unmen-
tioned items, F(1, 155) 1⁄4 8.69, p 1⁄4 .004, g2
p
1⁄4 .05, BF10 1⁄4 6.06. The difference between
‘Present’ indications for explicitly negated and
implicitly negated items in the immediate con-
dition was significant, F(1, 155) 1⁄4 5.16, p 1⁄4
.024, g2
p 1⁄4 .03, BF10 1⁄4 1.09. The explicitly
negated items were more often (M1⁄4 1.07)
indicated as ‘Present’ than implicitly negated
ones (M 1⁄4 0.74). The number of ‘Present’
indications for the unmentioned items did not
differ significantly between the immediate and
the 1-week delay conditions, F(1, 155) 1⁄4
0.21, p 1⁄4 .646, g2
p 1⁄4 .00, BF10 1⁄4 0.09.
The hypothesized NRFM effect was pre-
sent in the delayed condition: items that were
both explicitly negated (M1⁄4 1.66) and impli-
citly negated (M 1⁄4 1.63) in the description
were more often reported as ‘Present’ than
items
that
were
not
mentioned
at
all
(M 1⁄4 1.28): F(1, 155) 1⁄4 7.25, p 1⁄4 .008, g2
p 1⁄4
.04, BF10 1⁄4 3.00; F(1, 155) 1⁄4 5.70, p 1⁄4 .018,
g2
p 1⁄4 .04, BF10 1⁄4 1.44, respectively. This
pattern of results confirms that negated
items tend to be remembered as present
more often than unmentioned items, which
supports Hypotheses 2a and 2b regarding
the NRFM effect. From the perspective of
frequency statistics, the results are statistic-
ally significant and support Hypotheses 2a
and 2b regarding the NRFM effect. From
the perspective of Bayesian statistics, the
results remain inconclusive. The difference
between explicitly negated items and impli-
citly negated items in the delayed condition
was not significant, F(1, 155) 1⁄4 0.06, p 1⁄4
.805, g2
p < .01. Bayesian analysis sup-
ported the nonexistence of a difference,
BF10 1⁄4 0.08.
Furthermore, in the delayed memory test
condition, there were no statistically signifi-
cant differences between the number of false
alarms for misleading (that is, mentioned;
M1⁄4 1.86) versus explicitly negated details,
F(1, 155) 1⁄4 1.61, p 1⁄4 .206, g2
p 1⁄4 .01, as well
as between the number of false alarms for mis-
leading versus implicitly negated details, F(1,
155) 1⁄4 2.41, p 1⁄4 .123, g2
p 1⁄4 .02. The
Bayesian analysis revealed that the Bayes fac-
tor for the differences between misleading and
explicitly
negated
details
remembered
as
‘present’ was BF10 1⁄4 0.18, which means that
there were no differences.
Similarly, when comparing misleading and
implicitly negated details, the Bayesian ana-
lysis indicated that there were no differences
(BF10 1⁄4 0.27).
In contrast to the significant interaction of
delay with the type of information, the inter-
action of type of information with typicality
was not significant, F(3, 465) 1⁄4 1.36, p 1⁄4
.253, g2
p 1⁄4 .01, BF10 1⁄4 0.16. There was a sig-
nificant main effect of typicality on the num-
ber of ‘Present’ responses overall, F(1, 155) 1⁄4
31.20, p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .17, BF10 > 100. In
general,
typical
items
(M 1⁄4 1.67)
were
reported as ‘Present’ more often than atypical
ones (M 1⁄4 1.11). For every type of informa-
tion, there were more false alarms for typical
649

details than for their atypical counterparts.
Thus, there were significantly more false
alarms for misleading typical items then for
misleading atypical items, F(1, 155) 1⁄4 7.38,
p 1⁄4 .007, g2
p 1⁄4 .45, BF10 1⁄4 3.16, which sup-
ported Hypothesis 3a. More false alarms were
noted for explicitly negated typical items than
for explicitly negated atypical items, F(1, 155)
1⁄4 9.56, p 1⁄4 .002, g2
p 1⁄4 .06, BF10 1⁄4 9.09,
which means Hypothesis 3b was supported.
Likewise, there were more false alarms for
implicitly negated typical items than for impli-
citly negated atypical items, F(1, 155) 1⁄4 6.19,
p 1⁄4 .014, g2
p 1⁄4 .04, BF10 1⁄4 1.76, which sup-
ported Hypothesis 3c, but the Bayes factor did
not support it. Finally, there were also more
false alarms for unmentioned typical items
than for unmentioned atypical items, F(1, 155)
1⁄4 27.01, p < .001, g2
p 1⁄4 .15, BF10 > 100,
which means Hypothesis 3d was confirmed.
Taken together, Hypothesis 3 was supported,
according to which there should be more false
alarms
for
typical
misleading,
explicitly
negated, implicitly negated and unmentioned
items than for atypical items of each of these
types.
Finally, the three-way interaction of type
of information, delay and typicality was not
significant, F(3, 465) 1⁄4 1.87, p 1⁄4 .135, g2
p 1⁄4
.01, BF 1⁄4 2.30.
Discussion
The goal of this study was to examine how
memory concerning the presence of given
items is affected by PEI in the form of misin-
formation or information that correctly neg-
ates, explicitly or implicitly, some items. The
results of our study support the widely held
view in the literature that ‘human memory is
not a recording device, but rather a process of
(re)construction that is vulnerable to both
internal and external influences’ (Van Damme
& Smets, 2014, p. 310). There have been hun-
dreds of studies on misinformation over the
past 40 years, most of which have focused on
post-event
information
that
implants
new
memories or alters existing ones (Loftus,
2005), thus demonstrating that suggestion is a
powerful tool that can elicit vivid false memo-
ries. Surprisingly little research, however, has
addressed the question of whether negation
can distort memories of witnessed events. To
answer this question, in our experiment we
applied a three-step procedure that is com-
monly used to study the misinformation effect.
In the first phase, participants witnessed an
event by watching a short video. In the second
phase, they were exposed to misleading, expli-
citly negated and implicitly negated informa-
tion about some critical details of the event
(some details were also not mentioned and
served as control items). This information was
presented by means of a narrative. In the third
and final phase, a recognition memory test
about the original event was administered: par-
ticipants were asked to indicate whether a
given item was present in the video.
Our first hypothesis regarding replication
of the misinformation effect was supported.
Regardless of time delay and the typicality of
details, participants were more likely to indi-
cate that misleading items were present in the
original watched material – that is, the video –
than unmentioned items. Like numerous previ-
ous studies, our experiment demonstrated that
people often remember misleading informa-
tion from post-event information as part of the
original witnessed event; that is, they are prone
to incorporating external suggestions into their
memory of the event (e.g. Belli et al., 1994;
Calvillo et al., 2016; Loftus, 1979; Loftus
et al., 1978; McCloskey & Zaragoza, 1985;
Takarangi et al., 2006). According to the effect
size classification proposed by Cohen (1969;
see also Richardson, 2011), an effect for which
the partial eta squared reaches a value of .1279
is considered large. Thus, the misinformation
effect from our study, with a value of .15, can
be interpreted as large.
The most important findings of the present
experiment concern the NRFM effect. In the
1-week
time
delay
condition,
explicitly
negated details were more often indicated as
650

present in the original material than unmen-
tioned details. Similarly, implicitly negated
details were more frequently indicated as pre-
sent in the video after 1 week than unmen-
tioned details. It should obviously be noted
that these results should be treated with cau-
tion because the Bayes factor was not large.
According to the adopted interpretation frame-
work, this means that, in the case of explicitly
negated details, evidence was weak at best in
favour of the alternative hypothesis, which
states that the number of ‘Present’ responses
in the 1-week delay condition will be higher
than for unmentioned items. In the case of
implicitly negated details, the Bayes factor
pointed to weak evidence in favour of the
alternative hypothesis, which states that the
number of ‘Present’ responses in the one-week
delay condition will be higher for these objects
than for unmentioned items.
In line with the Bayesian analyses, there is
strong support for the idea that implicit and
explicit negation have analogous effects on
memory: there were no differences between
implicit and explicit negation as regards the
number of false alarms. As in the study by
Maciuszek et al. (2019b), our results also sug-
gest that these two types of negation can result
in the same memory quality.
This
result
seems
to
be
unexpected
because most studies show that negation is
more difficult to process, and when comparing
explicit and implicit negation, the former is
more difficult. One proposed explanation for
the ‘negation effect’ assumes that the use of
negation can lead to processing challenges,
especially in early childhood, because of its
negative connotation, which is strongly associ-
ated with prohibitions (Kaup & Dudschig,
2020). According to Kaup and Dudschig
(2020), in the case of implicit negation, the
negation marker responsible for unpleasant
connotations with prohibitions is not present in
the sentence; therefore, implicit negation leads
to smaller negation effects than explicit neg-
ation. This hypothesis is supported by the
results of several studies (Eifermann, 1961,
Jones, 1968; Wason & Jones, 1963, but see:
Clark, 1974). This was also true for the imme-
diate memory test condition in our study. If we
consider the number of false alarms as an indi-
cator of negation processing efficiency (the
lower the number of false alarms, the better
the negation processing), then in the immedi-
ate condition implicit negation indeed gener-
ates
fewer
errors
than
explicit
negation.
However, no such effect was observed for the
delayed memory test condition, in which there
was an NRFM effect. An explanation for why,
in the delayed condition, both negations have
the same effect on memory and on misinfor-
mation might be that participants forget the
context in which a particular word appeared. It
may be that, after a week, participants remem-
ber that the object appeared somewhere, but
they do not remember the content of the ori-
ginal and subsequent material well enough (or
they confuse the two sources) to be able to cor-
rectly reconstruct the source and context in
which the object was mentioned. In subse-
quent studies, it would be worthwhile to test
the context hypothesis – for example, using a
memory test that employs cued recall or
reminding subjects of the context in which the
object appeared.
In our study, we used a set of typical and
atypical details. As predicted, typical details
were more often remembered as ‘present’ than
atypical details. This relationship was signifi-
cant for each type of detail: misleading, expli-
citly
negated,
implicitly
negated
and
unmentioned. This is consistent with our pre-
diction, based on findings from previous stud-
ies, that typical details may be more easily
implemented into memory and that when
memory gaps occur, the person may resort to
schemata to fill them (e.g. Garcıa-Bajos &
Migueles, 2003; Lampinen et al., 2001; Luna
& Seco, 2008).
Our results can also be considered from
the point of view of the violation of communi-
cation norms. The negations we used in our
post-event
materials
negated
side
details.
Participants may have felt that they were not
651

paying attention to the presence or absence of
these details in the original material (because
they were focused on the action of the video,
for example). Denying the presence of these
elements may be considered as unlicensed
negation, which contradicts Grice’s (1975)
maxims
of
relevance
in
communication.
Therefore, they could have perceived the neg-
ation of, for example, the presence of the mir-
ror in the travel agency as unexpected or odd.
As a result, participants may conclude that the
negation of information that is irrelevant from
their point of view has a hidden purpose,
which makes them sceptical of the informa-
tion, and although they may not remember
whether the mirror was present or not, they
begin to believe that it was. This may be espe-
cially true for details that fit a schema, such as
a typical office or the clothing of a motorcyc-
list. However, in the absence of a pilot test on
typical and atypical details, the conclusions we
can draw in this regard are limited.
Practical implications, limitations and
future directions
It is not hard to imagine that the situation
described in the introduction really happened.
Thus, the results of our study may have serious
applied implications as they show the danger
that lurks during interrogations: a witness
exposed to PEI that implants or alters certain
details about an event may inadvertently give
false testimony, thus risking a potentially inno-
cent person spending years in prison for some-
thing they did not do. Worse yet, an honest
witness who encounters truthful PEI that
something was not present or that something
did not happen may later develop false memo-
ries about the presence of that thing or the
occurrence of the event.
An undeniable weakness of the study was
that we did not conduct a pilot study to con-
firm the selection of details considered typical
and atypical. However, as mentioned previ-
ously, the analyses related to the effect of typ-
icality
of
details
on
memory
were
an
additional objective of the study.
As the typicality was manipulated as a
between-participants design, one of the groups
of participants had all critical statements with
low typicality. This might have created some
suspicions which in turn might have impacted
the credibility of the post-event information.
This must be regarded as a weakness of the
present study.
From both a theoretical and a practical
point of view, it seems important to clarify the
boundary conditions for the generation of the
NRFM effect. For example, future studies
could use materials other than the video and
audio recording used in the current study to
examine the influence of the nature of the ori-
ginal material and critical items on the forma-
tion of memory distortions. In addition, it
would seem interesting to compare the influ-
ence of PEI in the form of explicit and implicit
negation against PEI in the form of questions.
We are not thinking of questions with false
presuppositions but about the form of senten-
ces in PEI. For example, if an explicit negated
PEI reads ‘There was no kitten there’, a ques-
tion form of PEI could read ‘Was there a kit-
ten?’. There is an experiment in which PEI in
the form of a question eliminated the misinfor-
mation effect, but in this study the final mem-
ory test was preceded by a warning (Lee &
Chen, 2013). From there, ways to prevent
NRFM are certainly worth exploring. Several
methods have been tested to reduce the nega-
tive impact of misleading PEI on memory.
These include warning (for review: Blank &
Launay, 2014), change-detection (Bailey et al.,
2021), Cognitive Interview (CI; e.g. Holliday
et al., 2012), mental warm-up (Szpitalak &
Polczyk, 2014) and reinforced self-affirmation
(RSA; Szpitalak, 2022; Szpitalak & Polczyk,
2013). It is possible that some of these could
prove effective in reducing the deleterious
effect of negation on witnesses’ memory.
This study used a three-step procedure to
study the misinformation effect. Its shortcom-
ing is that it does not allow us to check
whether, at the time of the final memory test,
the participant had both correct pieces of
652

information (from the original material and
PEI) in their memory, or whether they remem-
bered only one of them, had incorrect memo-
ries or had none at all. It was found that there
are people who are aware of the discrepancies
between original material and PEI but still suc-
cumb to the misinformation effect (Blank,
1998; Polczyk, 2017). It would therefore be
worthwhile to design a procedure to distin-
guish such individuals in the context of
NRFM. This is important because techniques
that reduce the deleterious effects of PEI on
memory are effective mainly in these subjects
(e.g. RSA; Szpitalak & Polczyk, 2015).
From the perspective of eyewitness testi-
mony practice, another aspect may also be
important. Eyewitnesses may encounter sev-
eral mutually contradictory pieces of informa-
tion after an event. A new line of research on
the influence of multiple pieces of mutually
contradictory misinformation was opened by
Blank’s team (Blank et al., 2022). In a series
of three experiments, they showed the com-
plex effect of multiple pieces of misinforma-
tion. On one hand, becoming aware of internal
contradictions between pieces of misinforma-
tion reduced the effects of these contradictions
on memory. On the other hand, in the case of
subtle misinformation, which is more difficult
to capture, being exposed to multiple pieces of
misinformation increases the chances that at
least one of them will be noticed and then
included in memory. It would be interesting to
examine how multiple pieces of post-event
information in the form of correct negation
and misinformation affect witness memory.
The present study suggests that explicit and
implicit negation and misinformation have
similar effects after a 1-week interval. It would
therefore be worthwhile to test their combined
effects on memory, taking into account longer
and shorter time intervals and varying the dis-
tinctiveness of details (distinct misinformation
is easier to detect, Polczyk, 2007).
Another interesting development in our
research could be to add an additional phase to
the procedure we use: participants’ memory
would be tested before exposing them to post-
event material. Extensive research on the
phenomenon
known
as
retrieval-enhanced
suggestibility (RES; e.g. J. C. Chan et al.,
2009; 2017), suggests that witnesses may be
more susceptible to misinformation if their
memory for the witnessed event was tested
before they were exposed to the misinforma-
tion. It would be interesting to investigate
whether, as in the case of misinformation, the
initial testing enhances the NRFM effect.
Ethical standards
Declaration of conflicts of interest
Iwona Dudek has declared no conflicts of
interest
Romuald Polczyk has declared no conflicts of
interest
Ethical approval
All procedures performed in studies involving
human participants were in accordance with
the
ethical
standards
of
the
Jagiellonian
University Institute of Psychology Research
Ethics Committee (opinion no. KE/35_2020)
and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its
later
amendments
or
comparable
ethical
standards.
Informed consent
Informed consent was obtained from all indi-
vidual participants included in the study
Funding
This study was supported by a mini-grant
dedicated to PhD students in the School of
Social Sciences at Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, Poland, received by Iwona Dudek.
ORCID
Iwona Dudek
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-
6487-1214
Romuald Polczyk
http://orcid.org/0000-
0002-0158-7742
653

References
Alba, J. W., & Hasher, L. (1983). Is memory
schematic?
Psychological
Bulletin,
93(2),
203–231.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.
93.2.203
Autry, K. S., & Duarte, S. E. (2021). Correcting
the
unknown:
Negated
corrections
may
increase belief in misinformation. Applied
Cognitive
Psychology,
35(4),
960–975.
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3823
Ayers, M. S., & Reder, L. M. (1998). A theoret-
ical review of the misinformation effect:
Predictions from an activation-based memory
model.
Psychonomic
Bulletin
&
Review,
5(1),
1–21.
https://doi.org/10.3758/BF032
09454
Bailey, N. A., Olaguez, A. P., Klemfuss, J. Z.,
& Loftus, E. F. (2021). Tactics for increas-
ing resistance to misinformation. Applied
Cognitive
Psychology,
35(4),
863–872.
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3812
Bartlett, F. A. (1932). A study in experimental and
social
psychology.
Cambridge
University
Press.
Belli, R. F., Lindsay, D. S., Gales, M. S., &
McCarthy, T. T. (1994). Memory impair-
ment and source misattribution in postevent
misinformation experiments with short reten-
tion intervals. Memory & Cognition, 22(1),
40–54. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03202760
Benton, T. R., Ross, D. F., Bradshaw, E.,
Thomas, W. N., & Bradshaw, G. S. (2006).
Eyewitness memory is still not common
sense: Comparing jurors, judges and law
enforcement to eyewitness experts. Applied
Cognitive
Psychology,
20(1),
115–129.
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.1171
Blank, H. (1998). Memory states and memory
tasks: An integrative framework for eyewit-
ness memory and suggestibility. Memory
(Hove, England), 6(5), 481–529. https://doi.
org/10.1080/741943086
Blank, H., & Launay, C. (2014). How to protect
eyewitness memory against the misinforma-
tion effect: A meta-analysis of post-warning
studies.
Journal
of
Applied
Research
in
Memory and Cognition, 3(2), 77–88. https://
doi.org/10.1037/h0101798
Blank, H., Panday, A., Edwards, R., Skopicz-
Radkiewicz, E., Gibson, V., & Reddy, V.
(2022). Double misinformation: Effects on
eyewitness remembering. Journal of Applied
Research in Memory and Cognition, 11(1),
97–105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jarmac.2021.
08.001
Bower, G. H., Black, J. B., & Turner, T. J. (1979).
Scripts
in
memory
for
text.
Cognitive
Psychology, 11(2), 177–220. https://doi.org/10.
1016/0010-0285(79)90009-4
Brewer, W. F., & Treyens, J. C. (1981). Role of
schemata in memory for places. Cognitive
Psychology, 13(2), 207–230. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0010-0285(81)90008-6
Calvillo,
D.
P.,
Parong,
J.
A.,
Peralta,
B.,
Ocampo, D., & Van Gundy, R. (2016).
Sleep increases susceptibility to the misinfor-
mation effect. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
30(6),
1061–1067.
https://doi.org/10.1002/
acp.3259
Chan, J. C., Manley, K. D., & Lang, K. (2017).
Retrieval-enhanced suggestibility: A retro-
spective and a new investigation. Journal of
Applied Research in Memory and Cognition,
6(3), 213–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jar-
mac.2017.07.003
Chan, J. C., Thomas, A. K., & Bulevich, J. B.
(2009). Recalling a witnessed event increases
eyewitness suggestibility: The reversed test-
ing effect. Psychological Science, 20(1), 66–
73. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.
02245.x
Chan, M. S., Jones, C. R., Hall Jamieson, K., &
Albarracın, D. (2017). Debunking: A meta-
analysis of the psychological efficacy of
messages
countering
misinformation.
Psychological Science, 28(11), 1531–1546.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797617714579
Chrobak, Q. M., & Zaragoza, M. S. (2008).
Inventing stories: Forcing witnesses to fabri-
cate entire fictitious events leads to freely
reported
false
memories.
Psychonomic
Bulletin
&
Review,
15(6),
1190–1195.
https://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.15.6.1190
Clark, H. H. (1974). Semantics and comprehen-
sion. In T. A. Sebeok (Ed.), Current trends
in linguistics, vol. 12: Linguistics and adja-
cent arts (pp. 1291–1428). Mouton.
Clark, H. H. (1980). Semantics and comprehen-
sion. De Gruyter Mouton.
Cohen, J. (1969). Statistical power analysis for
the behavioral sciences. Academic Press.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for
the
behavioral
sciences
(2nd
ed.).
L.
Erlbaum Associates.
Cook, J., & Lewandowsky, S. (2012). The debunk-
ing handbook. University of Queensland.
Dalton, A. L., & Daneman, M. (2006). Social
suggestibility to central and peripheral misin-
formation. Memory (Hove, England), 14(4),
486–501.
https://doi.org/10.1080/096582105
00495073
Davidson, D. (1994). Recognition and recall of
irrelevant and interruptive atypical actions in
script-based stories. Journal of Memory and
654

Language, 33(6), 757–775. https://doi.org/10.
1006/jmla.1994.1036
de Vega, M., Morera, Y., Leon, I., Beltran, D.,
Casado, P., & Martın-Loeches, M. (2016).
Sentential negation might share neurophysio-
logical mechanisms with action inhibition.
Evidence from frontal theta rhythm. The
Journal
of
Neuroscience
:
The
Official
Journal of the Society for Neuroscience,
36(22), 6002–6010. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.3736-15.2016
Deutsch, R., Gawronski, B., & Strack, F. (2006).
At the boundaries of automaticity: Negation
as
reflective
operation.
Journal
of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91(3),
385–405.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.
91.3.385
Dudschig, C., & Kaup, B. (2018). How does “not
left”
become
“right”?
Electrophysiological
evidence for a dynamic conflict-bound neg-
ation
processing
account.
Journal
of
Experimental Psychology. Human Perception
and Performance, 44(5), 716–728. https://doi.
org/10.1037/xhp0000481
Dudschig, C., Mackenzie, I. G., Maienborn, C.,
Kaup, B., & Leuthold, H. (2019). Negation
and the N400: Investigating temporal aspects
of negation integration using semantic and
world-knowledge
violations.
Language.
Cognition and Neuroscience, 34(3), 309–
319.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.
1535127
Ecker, U. K. H., Lewandowsky, S., Cook, J.,
Schmid,
P.,
Fazio,
L.
K.,
Brashier,
N.,
Kendeou, P., Vraga, E. K., & Amazeen,
M. A. (2022). The psychological drivers of
misinformation belief and its resistance to
correction. Nature Reviews Psychology, 1(1),
13–29.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159-021-
00006-y10.1038/s44159-021-00006-y
Eifermann, R. R. (1961). Negation: A linguistic
variable.
Acta
Psychologica,
18,
269–
278.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6918(61)9
0016-6
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A.-G., & Buchner,
A. (2007). GPower 3: A flexible statistical
power
analysis
program
for
the
social,
behavioral,
and
biomedical
sciences.
Behavior Research Methods, 39(2), 175–191.
https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03193146
Ferguson, H. J., Sanford, A. J., & Leuthold, H.
(2008). Eye-movements and ERPs reveal the
time
course
of
processing
negation
and
remitting
counterfactual
worlds.
Brain
Research, 1236, 113–125. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.brainres.2008.07.099
Fiedler, K., Walther, E., Armbruster, T., Fay, D.,
& Naumann, U. (1996). Do you really know
what you have seen? Intrusion errors and
presuppositions effects on constructive mem-
ory.
Journal
of
Experimental
Social
Psychology, 32(5), 484–511. https://doi.org/
10.1006/jesp.1996.0022
Garcıa-Bajos, E., & Migueles, M. (2003). False
memories for script actions in a mugging
account.
European
Journal
of
Cognitive
Psychology, 15(2), 195–208. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09541440244000102
Grant, S. J., Malaviya, P., & Sternthal, B.
(2004). The influence of negation on product
evaluations. Journal of Consumer Research,
31(3),
583–591.
https://doi.org/10.1086/
425093
Greenspan, R. L., & Loftus, E. F. (2021).
Pandemics and infodemics: Research on the
effects
of
misinformation
on
memory.
Human
Behavior
and
Emerging
Technologies, 3(1), 8–12. https://doi.org/10.
1002/hbe2.228
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In
P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and
semantics: Vol. 3: Speech acts (pp. 41–58).
Academic Press.
Heath, W. P., & Erickson, J. R. (1998). Memory
for central and peripheral actions and props
after varied post-event presentation. Legal
and Criminological Psychology, 3(2), 321–
346.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8333.
1998.tb00369.x
Hekkanen, S. T., & McEvoy, C. (2002). False
memories and source-monitoring problems:
Criterion
differences.
Applied
Cognitive
Psychology, 16(1), 73–85. https://doi.org/10.
1002/acp.753
Holliday, R. E., Humphries, J. E., Milne, R.,
Memon, A., Houlder, L., Lyons, A., & Bull,
R. (2012). Reducingmisinformation effects
in older adults with cognitive interview mne-
monics. Psychology and Aging, 27(4), 1191–
1203. https://doi.org/10.1037/a002203
Holst, V. F., & Pezdek, K. (1992). Scripts for
typical crimes and their effects on memory
for eyewitness testimony. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 6(7), 573–587. https://doi.org/
10.1002/acp.2350060702
Innocence Project. (2023). DNA exonerations in
the United States. Retrieved March 4, 2023,
from
http://www.innocenceproject.org/dna-
exonerations-in-the-united-stateshttp://www.
innocenceproject.org/dna-exonerations-in-the-
united-states
Jones, S. (1968). Instructions, self-instructions,
and performance. The Quarterly Journal of
655

Experimental
Psychology,
20(1),
74–78.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14640746808400130
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1976). Eye fixa-
tions
and
cognitive
processes.
Cognitive
Psychology, 8(4), 441–480. https://doi.org/
10.1016/0010-0285(76)90015-3
Kaup, B., & Dudschig, C. (2020). Understanding
negation: Issues in the processing of neg-
ation. In V. Deprez & T. Espinal (Eds.), The
Oxford handbook of negation (pp. 635–655).
Oxford University Press.
Kaup, B., L€udtke, J., & Zwaan, R. A. (2006).
Processing negated sentences with contra-
dictory predicates: Is a door that is not open
mentally
closed?
Journal
of
Pragmatics,
38(7), 1033–1050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pragma.2005.09.012
Keppel, G., & Wickens, T. D. (2004). Design
and analysis (4th ed.). Prentice-Hall.
Lampinen, J. M., Copeland, S. M., & Neuschatz,
J. S. (2001). Recollections of things sche-
matic: Room schemas revisited. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology.
Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27(5), 1211–1222.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.27.5.1211
Lee, Y., & Chen, K.-N. (2013). Post-event infor-
mation presented in a question form elimi-
nates
the
misinformation
effect.
British
Journal of Psychology (London, England :
1953), 104(1), 119–129. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.2044-8295.2012.02109.x
Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K. H., Seifert,
C. M., Schwarz, N., & Cook, J. (2012).
Misinformation and its correction: Continued
influence
and
successful
debiasing.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest
: A Journal of the American Psychological
Society, 13(3), 106–131. https://doi.org/10.
1177/1529100612451018
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1989). The
eyewitness suggestibility effect and memory
for source. Memory & Cognition, 17(3), 349–
358. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03198473
Lindsay, D. S., Hagen, L., Read, J. D., Wade,
K. A., & Garry, M. (2004). True photo-
graphs and false memories. Psychological
Science, 15(3), 149–154. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.0956-7976.2004.01503002.x
Loehr, J., & Marche, T. (2006). Omitting details
from post-event information: Are true and
false memory affected in the same way?
Memory
(Hove,
England),
14(1),
17–26.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210444000467
Loftus, E. F. (1979). The malleability of human
memory. American Scientist, 67(3), 312–320.
Loftus, E. F. (2005). Planting misinformation in
the human mind: A 30-year investigation of
the malleability of memory. Learning &
Memory (Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.), 12(4),
361–366. https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.94705
Loftus, E. F., & Pickrell, J. E. (1995). The for-
mation
of
false
memories.
Psychiatric
Annals, 25(12), 720–725. https://doi.org/10.
3928/0048-5713-19951201-07
Loftus, E. F., Miller, D. G., & Burns, H. J.
(1978). Semantic integration of verbal infor-
mation into a visual memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 4(1), 19–31. https://doi.org/10.
1037/0278-7393.4.1.19
Luna, K., & Migueles, M. (2009). Acceptance
and confidence of central and peripheral
misinformation.
The
Spanish
Journal
of
Psychology, 12(2), 405–413. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1138741600001797
Luna, K., & Seco, M. M. (2008). Typicality and
misinformation: Two sources of distortion.
Psicologica:
Revista
de
Metodologıa
y
Psicologıa Experimental, 29(2), 171–187.
Maciuszek, J. (2013). Don’t pay attention to
what
you
see!
Negative
commands
and
attention bias. Polish Psychological Bulletin,
44(1),
70–84.
https://doi.org/10.2478/ppb-
2013-0008
Maciuszek, J., & Polczyk, R. (2017). There was
not, they did not: May negation cause the
negated ideas to be remembered as existing?
PloS One, 12(4), e0176452. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0176452
Maciuszek,
J.,
Polak,
M.,
&
Sekulak,
M.
(2019a). There is no item vs. I wish there
were an item: Implicit negation causes false
recall just as well as explicit negation. PLOS
One,
14(4),
e0215283.
https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0215283
Maciuszek,
J.,
Polak,
M.,
&
Sekulak,
M.
(2019b). Memory effects of implicit and
explicit
negation
in
a
visual
setting:
Negation based on implicatures leads to a
similar number of false memory alarms as
overt
negation.
Polish
Psychological
Bulletin, 50(4), 293–302. https://doi.org/10.
24425/ppb.2019.131002
Martın-Luengo, B., Luna, K., & Migueles, M.
(2013). Memory for radio advertisements:
The
effect
of
program
and
typicality.
The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 16(e80),
E80. https://doi.org/10.1017/sjp.2013.80
Masson, M. E. J. (2011). A tutorial on a prac-
tical Bayesian alternative to null-hypothesis
significance
testing.
Behavior
Research
Methods, 43(3), 679–690. https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13428-010-0049-5
656

Mayo, R., Schul, Y., & Burnstein, E. (2004). I
am not guilty” vs “I am innocent”: Successful
negation may depend on the schema used for
its encoding. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 40(4), 433–449. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jesp.2003.07.008
Mayo, R., Schul, Y., & Rosenthal, M. (2014). If
you negate, you may forget: Negated repeti-
tions impair memory compared with affirma-
tive
repetitions.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology.
General,
143(4),
1541–1552.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036122
McCloskey,
M.,
&
Zaragoza,
M.
(1985).
Misleading postevent information and mem-
ory for events: Arguments and evidence
against
memory
impairment
hypotheses.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology.
General,
114(1),
1–16.
https://doi.org/10.
1037/0096-3445.114.1.1
Nakamura, G. V., Graesser, A. C., Zimmerman,
J. A., & Riha, J. (1985). Script processing in a
natural situation. Memory & Cognition, 13(2),
140–144. https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03197006
Newman, V. E., Yee, H. F., Walker, A. R.,
Toumbelekis, M., & Most, S. B. (2021). Out
of fright, out of mind: Impaired memory for
information negated during looming threat.
Cognitive
Research:
Principles
and
Implications,
6(1),
36.
https://doi.org/10.
1186/s41235-021-00302-4
Nieuwland, M. S., & Kuperberg, G. R. (2008).
When the truth is not too hard to handle: An
event-related potential study on the prag-
matics of negation. Psychological Science,
19(12), 1213–1218. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1467-9280.2008.02226.x
Pickrell, J. E., McDonald, D. L., Bernstein,
D.
M.,
&
Loftus,
E.
F.
(2016).
Misinformation effect. In Cognitive illusions
(pp. 416–433). Psychology Press.
Polczyk, R. (2007). Mechanizmy efektu dezinfor-
macji w kontekscie zeznan swiadka naocz-
nego. [Mechanisms of the misinformation
effect in the context of eyewitness memory].
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Jagiellonskiego.
Polczyk, R. (2017). The “memory” misinforma-
tion effect may not be caused by memory
failures: Exploring memory states of misin-
formed
subjects.
Polish
Psychological
Bulletin, 48(3), 388–400. https://doi.org/10.
1515/ppb-2017-0045
Prike, T., Blackley, P., Swire-Thompson, B., &
Ecker, U. K. (2023). It was not drugs! No
evidence for corrections backfiring when
presented
without
initial
misinformation
exposure. PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/
osf.io/u7s2b
Richardson, J. T. E. (2011). Eta squared and par-
tial eta squared as measures of effect size in
educational research. Educational Research
Review,
6(2),
135–147.
https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.edurev.2010.12.001
Rosenthal,
R.,
&
Rosnow,
R.
L.
(1985).
Contrasts analysis: Focused comparisons in
the
analysis
of
variance.
Cambridge
University Press.
Rosnow, R. L., & Rosenthal, R. (1989). Definition
and
interpretation
of
interaction
effects.
Psychological
Bulletin,
105(1),
143–146.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.105.1.143
Schwarz, N., Sanna, L. J., Skurnik, I., & Yoon,
C. (2007). Metacognitive experiences and
the intricacies of setting people straight:
Implications for debiasing and public infor-
mation
campaigns.
Advances
in
Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 127–
161.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(06)
39003-X10.1016/S0065-2601(06)39003-X
Smith, V. L., & Studebaker, C. A. (1996). What
do you expect?: The influence of people’s
prior
knowledge
of
crime
categories
on
fact-finding.
Law
and
Human
Behavior,
20(5),
517–532.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF0
1499039
Stangor, C., & McMillan, D. (1992). Memory
for expectancy-congruent and expectancy-
incongruent information: A review of the
social and social developmental literatures.
Psychological
Bulletin,
111(1),
42–61.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.111.1.42
Swire-Thompson, B., DeGutis, J., & Lazer, D.
(2020). Searching for the backfire effect:
Measurement
and
design
considerations.
Journal of Applied Research in Memory and
Cognition, 9(3), 286–299. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jarmac.2020.06.006
Swire-Thompson, B., Miklaucic, N., Wihbey,
J. P., Lazer, D., & DeGutis, J. (2022). The
backfire effect after correcting misinforma-
tion is strongly associated with reliability.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology.
General, 151(7), 1655–1665. https://doi.org/
10.1037/xge000113110.1037/xge0001131
Szpitalak, M. (2022). Reinforced self-affirmation
as a method of reducing the misinformation
effect:
Towards
ecological
validity.
Psychology, Crime & Law, 1–29. https://doi.
org/10.1080/1068316X.2022.2093872
Szpitalak, M., & Polczyk, R. (2013). Promoting
eyewitness testimony quality: Warning vs.
Reinforced self-affirmation as methods of
reduction
of
the
misinformation
effect.
Polish Psychological Bulletin, 44(1), 85–91.
https://doi.org/10.2478/ppb-2013-0009
657

Szpitalak, M., & Polczyk, R. (2014). Mental
fatigue, mental warm-up, and self-reference
as determinants of the misinformation effect.
The
Journal
of
Forensic
Psychiatry
&
Psychology, 25(2), 135–151. https://doi.org/
10.1080/14789949.2014.895024
Szpitalak, M., & Polczyk, R. (2015). Reinforced
self-affirmation as a method for reducing the
eyewitness misinformation effect. Psychology,
Crime & Law, 21(10), 911–938. https://doi.
org/10.1080/1068316X.2015.1077243
Takarangi, M. K. T., Parker, S., & Garry, M.
(2006).
Modernising
the
misinformation
effect: The development of a new stimulus
set. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20(5),
583–590. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.1209
Van Damme, I., & Smets, K. (2014). The power
of emotion versus the power of suggestion:
Memory for emotional events in the misin-
formation paradigm. Emotion (Washington,
D.C.),
14(2),
310–320.
https://doi.org/10.
1037/a0034629
van Doorn, J., van den Bergh, D., B€ohm, U.,
Dablander, F., Derks, K., Draws, T., Etz, A.,
Evans, N. J., Gronau, Q. F., Haaf, J. M.,
Hinne, M., Kucharsky, S., Ly, A., Marsman,
M.,
Matzke,
D.,
Gupta,
A.
R.
K.
N.,
Sarafoglou, A., Stefan, A., Voelkel, J. G., &
Wagenmakers,
E.-J.
(2021).
The
JASP
guidelines for conducting and reporting a
Bayesian analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 28(3), 813–826. https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13423-020-01798-5
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The
spread of true and false news online. Science
(New York, N.Y.), 359(6380), 1146–1151.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap9559
Wade, K. A., Garry, M., Don Read, J., &
Lindsay, D. S. (2002). A picture is worth a
thousand lies: Using false photographs to
create
false
childhood
memories.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(3), 597–
603. https://doi.org/10.3758/bf03196318
Walter, N., & Tukachinsky, R. (2020). A meta-
analytic examination of the continued influ-
ence
of
misinformation
in
the
face
of
correction: How powerful is it, why does it
happen, and how to stop it? Communication
Research, 47(2), 155–177. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0093650219854600
Wason, P. C. (1959). The processing of positive
and
negative
information.
Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 11(2),
92–107. https://doi.org/10.1080/1747021590
8416296
Wason, P. C., & Jones, S. (1963). Negatives:
Denotation and connotation. British Journal
of Psychology (London, England : 1953),
54(4),
299–307.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
2044-8295.1963.tb00885.x
Wegner, D. M., Ansfield, M., & Pilloff, D.
(1998). The putt and the pendulum: Ironic
effects of
the
mental control of action.
Psychological
Science,
9(3),
196–199.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00037
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R.,
& White, T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects
of
thought
suppression.
Journal
of
Personality and Social Psychology, 53(1), 5–
13. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.53.1.5
Wells, G. L., & Loftus, E. F. (2003). Eyewitness
memory for people and events. In A. M.
Goldstein (Ed.), Handbook of psychology:
Forensic psychology (Vol. 11, pp. 149–160).
John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Wirth, R., Kunde, W., & Pfister, R. (2019). How
not to fall for the white bear: Combined fre-
quency and recency manipulations diminish
negation effects on overt behavior. Journal
of
Cognition,
2(1),
11.
https://doi.org/10.
5334/joc.62
World
Health
Organization
(WHO).
(2020).
Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV): Situation
report.
WHO.
https://www.who.int/docs/
defaultsource/coronaviruse/situation-reports/
20200202-sitrep-13-ncovv3.pdf
Wright, D. B., Loftus, E. F., & Hall, M. (2001).
Now you see it; now you don’t: Inhibiting
recall and recognition of scenes. Applied
Cognitive
Psychology,
15(5),
471–482.
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.719
Xiang, M., Grove, J., & Giannakidou, A. (2016).
Semantic and pragmatic processes in the
comprehension of negation: An event related
potential study of negative polarity sensitiv-
ity. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 38, 71–88.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2015.11.
001
Zaragoza, M. S., Belli, R. F., & Payment,
K. E. (2007). Misinformation effects and
the suggestibility of eyewitness memory.
In
Do
justice
and
let
the
sky
fall:
Elizabeth Loftus and her contributions to
science, law, and academic freedom (pp.
35–63).
Lawrence
Erlbaum
Associates
Publishers.
658